The Telekommunist Manifesto
===========================

Dmitry Kleiner

Technical information:
The Telekommunist Manifesto
Dmytri Kleiner
Network Notebooks 03
Publisher: Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam

The Telekommunist Manifesto is composed of texts that have been extended and
reworked by Dmytri Kleiner, from texts by Joanne Richardson, Brian Wyrick and
Dmytri Kleiner, 2004–2008.

A pdf of this publication can be freely downloaded at:
http://www.networkcultures.org/networknotebooks

This publication is licensed under the Peer Production License (2010).
Commercial use encouraged for Independent and Collective/Commons-based users.

Amsterdam, October 2010.
ISBN/EAN 978-90-816021-2-9 

Table of Contents

Foreword

* Introduction

* Peer-to-Peer Communism vs. The Client-Server Capitalist State 
  * The Conditions of the Working Class on the Internet
  * Trapped in the World Wide Web

* Peer Production and the Poverty of Networks

* Venture Communism

* Manifesto of The Telekommunisten Network

* A Contribution to The Critique of Free Culture 

	Copyright is a System of Censorship and Exploitation 

	The Creative Anti-Commons

	Free Software: Copyright Eats Itself

	Free Culture Requires a Free Society: Copyfarleft

Venture Communism and Copyfarleft

Peer Production License: A Model for Copyfarleft

References

## Prefacio

I coined the term ‘Venture Communism’ in 2001 to promote the ideal of workers’
self-organization of production as a way of addressing class conflict.
Telekommunisten is a collective based in Berlin, Germany, where I have lived
since 2003. I first encountered the term ‘Telekommunisten’ (which became the
name of the collective) in 2005, while visiting the apartment of a friend. He
and his roommate had given the name ‘Telekommunisten’ to the local area network
used in their apartment to share internet access. 

Acuñé el término "Comunismo de Riesgo" en el 2011 para promover el ideal de la
autoorganización productiva de los trabajadores como forma de resolver el
conflicto de clase. Telekommunisten \[telecomunista\] es un colectivo con base
en Berlín, Alemania, donde vivo desde el 2003. Me encontré con el término
"Telekommunisten" (que se convertiría en el nombre del colectivo) en el 2005,
cuando visitaba el departamento de un amigo. Él y su compañero habían nombrado
"telecomunista" a la red de área local que usaban en su departamento para
compartir acceso a Internet.

Telekommunisten had been used as a derogatory term for Germany’s former state
telephone company, Deutsch Telekomm, which is now a private transnational
corporation whose ‘T-Mobile’ brand is known worldwide. The usage of communist
here is intended to cast the telephone company as a monolithic, authoritarian,
and bureaucratic behemoth. This is a completely different understanding to the
positive use of the term as an engagement in class conflict towards the goal of
a free society without economic classes, where people produce and share as
equals, a society with no property and no state, that produces not for profit,
but for social value. In this way, we are not simply a collective of
worker-agitators toiling in the sphere of telecommunications. Telekommunisten
promotes the notion of a distributed communism: a communism at a distance, a
Tele-communism. A venture commune is not bound to one physical location where
it can be isolated and confined. Similar in topology to a peer-to-peer network,
Telekommunisten intends to be decentralized, with only minimal coordination
required amongst its international community of producer-owners.

Telecomunista había sido usado como un término derogatorio para la antigua
telefónica estatal de Alemania, Deutsch Telekomm, que ahora es una corporación
privada transnacional cuya marca "T-Mobile" es conocida en todo el mundo. La
utilización del comunismo aquí se refiere a la telefónica como un monstruo
monolítico, autoritario y burocrático. Este es un punto de vista totalmente
diferente al uso positivo del término para referirse al compromiso con el
conflicto de clases con el objetivo de una sociedad libre sin clases
económicas, donde la gente produce y comparte como iguales, una sociedad sin
propiedad ni Estado, que produce no para lucrar, sino por su valor social. De
esta manera, no somos simplemente un colectivo de agitadores en la esfera de
las telecomunicaciones. Telekommunisten promueve la noción de un comunismo
distribuido: un comunismo a la distancia, un tele-comunismo. Una comuna de
riesgo no está atada a una ubicación física donde pueder ser isolada y
confinada. Con una topología similar a una red de pares, Telekommunisten
intenta ser decentralizada, con sólo una mínima coordinación requerida entre su
comunidad internacional de productores-dueños.

My background is in the hacker and art communities, where I have been active
since the early 90s. My views have been developed and expressed in online and
offline correspondence in the course of my involvement in software development,
activism and cultural production. Although I have written a few essays over the
years, those who know my work generally know me personally through encounters
in electronic and physical social spaces. The present work is a ‘Manifesto’,
not in the sense that it outlines a complete theoretical system, a dogmatic set
of beliefs or the platform of a political movement, but in the spirit of the
meaning of manifesto as a beginning or introduction. Matteo Pasquinelli, who
pushed me to undertake this ‘Manifesto’, felt that my role as a background
voice in our community was too underground and declared it was ‘time to come
out’ with a published text. He connected me with Geert Lovink, who suggested
the structure and approach of the text and offered to serve as editor and,
through the Institute of Network Cultures, as its publisher.

Mi experiencia está en las comunidades hacker y artísticas, donde he estado
activo desde principios de los '90. Mis 

The Telekommunist Manifesto is largely a cut-up, a reworking of texts I’ve
produced and co-produced over the last few years. It incorporates significant
passages from ‘Copyright, Copyleft and the Creative Anti-Commons’ produced in
co-operation with Joanne Richardson and originally published under ‘Anna
Nimmus’ on the subsol website. Much of the text regarding the commercialization
of the internet is taken from ‘Infoenclosure 2.0’, co-written with Brian Wyrick
and originally published in Mute Magazine. Credit is also due to Mute Magazine
editors Josephine Berry Slater and Anthony Iles, for their work on ‘Infoenclure
2.0’ and ‘Copyjustright, Copyfarfleft’, much of which is reused here.

## Introducción

In the preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Marx
argues that, ‘at a certain stage of development, the material productive forces
of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production’.i What
is possible in the information age is in direct conflict with what is
permissible. Publishers, film producers and the telecommunication industry
conspire with lawmakers to bottle up and sabotage free networks, to forbid
information from circulating outside of their control. The corporations in the
recording industry attempt to forcibly maintain their position as mediators
between artists and fans, as fans and artists merge closer together and explore
new ways of interacting. 

Competing software makers, like arms manufacturers, play both sides in this
conflict: providing the tools to impose control, and the tools to evade it. The
non-hierarchical relations made possible by a peer network, such as the
internet, are contradictory with capitalism’s need for enclosure and control.
It’s a battle to the death; either the internet as we know it must go, or
capitalism as we know it must go. Will capital throw us back into the network
dark ages of CompuServe, mobile telephones and cable tv rather than allow peer
communications to bring about a new society? Yes, if they can. Marx concludes,
‘no social order ever perishes before all the productive forces for which there
is room in it have developed; and new, higher relations of production never
appear before the material conditions of their existence have matured in the
womb of the old society itself’.ii

The Telekommunist Manifesto is an exploration of class conflict and property,
born from a realization of the primacy of economic capacity in social
struggles. Emphasis is placed on the distribution of productive assets and
their output. The interpretation here is always tethered to an understanding
that wealth and power are intrinsically linked, and only through the former can
the latter be achieved. As a collective of intellectual workers, the work of
Telekommunisten is very much rooted in the free software and free culture
communities. However, a central premise of this Manifesto is that engaging in
software development and the production of immaterial cultural works is not
enough. The communization of immaterial property alone cannot change the
distribution of material productive assets, and therefore cannot eliminate
exploitation; only the self-organization of production by workers can.

This publication is intended as a summary of the positions that motivate the
Telekommunisten project, based on an exploration of class conflict in the age
of international telecommunications, global migration, and the emergence of the
information economy. The goal of this text is to introduce the political
motivations of Telekommunisten, including a sketch of the basic theoretical
framework in which it is rooted. Through two interrelated sections,
‘Peer-to-Peer Communism vs. The Client-Server Capitalist State’ and ‘A
Contribution to the Critique of Free Culture’, the Manifesto covers the
political economy of network topologies and cultural production respectively.
‘Peer-to-Peer Communism vs. The Client-Server Capitalist State’ focuses on the
commercialization of the internet and the emergence of networked distributed
production. It proposes a new form of organization as a vehicle for class
struggle: venture communism. The section ends with the famous program laid out
by Marx and Engels in their Communist Manifesto, adapted into a Manifesto for a
networked society. 

Building on the previous section, in ‘A Contribution to the Critique of Free
Culture’, the Manifesto continues with the history and misperceptions of
copyright, the free software movement, anticopyright/ copyleft dissent, and the
political economy of free software and free culture. The challenge of extending
the achievements of free software into free culture is addressed by connecting
it to the traditional program of the socialist left, resulting in copyfarleft
and offering the Peer Production License as a model.

This text is particularly addressed to politically motivated artists, hackers
and activists, not to evangelize a fixed position, but to contribute to an
ongoing critical dialogue.

## Peer-to-Peer Communism vs. The Client-Server Capitalist State 

_Ya publicado_

## El manifiesto de la red telecomunista

Forked from text extracted from Section 2 of The Manifesto of the Communist
Party. Marx/Engels 1848.xxiv

The first step in the revolution by the working class is to raise the
proletariat to the position of ruling class to develop a network of enterprises
where people produce for social value and share as equals, and to build and
expand the economic size of these enterprises to raise the organized
proletariat to the position of being the dominant economic class. Only when
workers control their own production can we win the battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political supremacy expanding economic power to
wrest, by degree, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise decentralise
all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the
proletariat organised as the ruling class; into a common stock directly in the
hands of those whose production depends on it and to thereby increase the total
productive forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means of
despotic inroads structuring our enterprises on the rights of property, and on
the conditions of bourgeois production; by means of measures, therefore, which
appear economically insufficient and untenable, and contrary to our ends, but
which, in the course of the movement, outstrip themselves, necessitate further
inroads upon the old social order, and are unavoidable as a means of entirely
revolutionising the mode of production.

These measures will, of course, be different in different countries
communities.

Nevertheless, in most advanced countries communities, the following will be
pretty generally applicable.

1.	(Abolition) Mutualization of property in (land) all instruments of
production and application of all rents (of land) to (public) mutual purposes.	

2.	(A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.) Establishment of a
guaranteed income in the form of a dividend paid to each member of the
community equal in amount to their per-capita share of all mutually collected
rent.

3.	(Abolition of all rights of inheritance.) The right to membership of all
who contribute their labor, and awarding of membership only by contribution of
labor, not by inheritance, purchase or transfer of any kind.

4.	(Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.) A binding
agreement with all member enterprises to forgo all private ownership of their
own productive assets, and instead take possession of what they need by renting
it from the mutual common stock.

5.	(Centralisation of credit in the hands of the state, by means of a national
bank with State capital and an exclusive monopoly.) Establishment of a mutual
bond market, where bonds are sold at auction for the purpose of building the
common stock of productive assets.

6.	(Centralisation of the means of communication and transport in the hands of
the State.) Development of resources that put the means of communication and
transport in the hands of all members.

7.	(Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the State;
the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and the improvement of the soil
generally in accordance with a common plan.) Provide to all enterprises the
opportunity to acquire and extend the available instruments of production to
the greatest degree possible.

8.	(Equal liability of all to work. Establishment of industrial armies,
especially for agriculture.) Equal opportunity of all to participate and
produce.

9.	(Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual
abolition of all the distinction between town and country by a more equable
distribution of the populace over the country.) Abolition of all the
distinction between producers and consumers and the transformation of relations
from market based transactions to generalized distribution, where production of
social value takes precedent over the production of goods for sale.

10.	(Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition of children’s
factory labor in its present form. Combination of education with industrial
production, &amp;c, &amp;c.) Establish knowledge and skill sharing networks and
systems of support for all members, and provide opportunities to develop skills
by contribution to production.

When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeared, and
all production has been (concentrated) distributed in the hands of (a) vast
associations (of) spanning the whole (nation) world, the public power will lose
its political character. Political power, properly so called, is merely the
organised power of one class for oppressing another. If the proletariat during
its contest with the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of circumstances,
to organise itself as a class, if, by means of (a revolution) self
organisation, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away by
force the old conditions of production, then it will, along with these
conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of class
antagonisms and of classes generally, and will thereby have abolished its own
supremacy as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antagonisms,
we shall have an association, in which the free development of each is the
condition for the free development of all.

## Contribución a la crítica de la Cultura Libre

‘We are in the midst of a revolution in the way that knowledge and culture are
created, accessed and transformed’, states the ‘Charter for Innovation,
Creativity and Access to Knowledge’, something of a manifesto for the free
culture movement.xxv This revolution is against a system of copyright that
developed along with capitalism and has the exploitation of creators as its
basis. It is in the context of the great disparity of wealth and the struggle
between classes that any investigation of cultural production must be
understood. 

Creating the conditions for the expropriation of creators has always been at
the root of copyright. This has been a subject of critique and dissent among
artists and authors as long as the notion of exclusive rights to ideas have
been around. This includes many who embrace complete opposition to copyright in
the form of anticopyright. The advent of digital culture and the popularity of
file sharing has brought certain forms of such dissent into the mainstream,
though often without the context of class struggle, and burdened by the common
misconception that copyright was at one time created in order to protect
cultural producers. This has led to projects like the Creative Commons, which
professes to promote the creation of a common culture, but actually limits
itself to promoting a more flexible model of private ownership. 

As software production joined cultural production in the sphere of creating
reproducible digital material, new forms of dissent and organization have
emerged from the community of free software creators. The free software
movement, and in particular its tremendous commercial success, produced methods
and tools that have proven to be of great value to the free culture movement.
Yet the free software movement has also created misconceptions, as the
economics of goods intended for use by producers, such as software, are
different than consumer goods, such as books, movies and music. In order to
apply the powerful model of copyleft licenses, a form of licensing which
guarantees the freedom of derivatives of such work, the differing economics of
software and culture must be taken into account and made to be compatible with
the emancipation of the working class broadly. Free culture cannot be
sustainable in an unfree society that requires consumer goods to capture
profits. Free culture can only be realized within the context of a free
society. 

While copyleft is very effective in creating a commons of software, to achieve
a commons of cultural works requires copyfarleft, a form of free licensing that
denies free access to organizations that hold their own assets outside the
commons.

## El copyright es un sistema de censura y explotación

The existence of ‘copy rights’ predates 18th century notions of the author’s
right to ownership.xxvi From the 16th to the 17th century royal licenses gave
exclusive rights to certain publishers to print particular texts. In 1557, an
exclusive printing monopoly was granted through a Royal Charter to a London
guild of printers, the Stationers’ Company, because it assured Crown control
over which books were published or banned. The first copyrights were
publisher’s rights to print copies, emerging out of the ideological needs of
absolutist monarchies to control knowledge and censor dissent.

After the Licensing Act expired in 1694, the monopoly of the Stationers’
Company was threatened by provincial booksellers, the so-called ‘pirates’ from
Ireland and Scotland. The Stationers’ Company petitioned Parliament for a new
bill to extend their copyright monopoly. But this was a different England from
1557, different from the Parliament that had executed King Charles I in 1649,
abolished the monarchy and installed a republic under Cromwell, restored the
monarchy with Charles II, overthrew James II in the Revolution of 1688, and, in
1689, passed the first decree of modern constitutional sovereignty, the Bill of
Rights. This was now John Locke’s England. 

The philosopher John Locke was among the chief architects of the liberal state
and the ideology of private property. To Locke, property was an extension of
one’s ownership of oneself. Since you own yourself, you therefore own what you
produce. The right to property is created by labor. The English Parliament now
took a view consistent with this outlook, and The Statute of Anne, enacted in
1709 by Parliament, proved to be a hard blow against the Stationers’ Company.
The Statute declared authors, not publishers, to be owners of their works and
limited the copyright term to 14 years for new books and 21 years for existing
copyrights. The Statute, which was subtitled ‘An Act for the Encouragement of
Learning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors or Purchasers
of such Copies, During the Times Therein Mentioned’, created a marketplace for
knowledge through competition. The Statute’s aim was not to create an author’s
copyright, but to break the Stationers’ Company’s monopoly.

The principal players, in what the press hailed as the great cause of literary
property, were not authors. Publishers sued each other in the courts, invoking
the author’s rights as a pretext in their battle for economic power. The notion
of the author as an originator, with a natural right to own their ideas, may
have been invented by artists and philosophers, but it was publishers who
profited. Laws are not made by poets but by states, and states exist to enforce
economic privilege, adopting whatever legitimizing philosophical framework they
find convenient at any given time. The Statute of Anne codified the capitalist
form of the author-publisher relationship. Authors had a right to own the
products of their labor in theory, but since they created immaterial ideas and
lacked the technological means to produce books, they had to sell their rights
to another party with enough capital to exploit them. In essence, it was no
different than any other sale of labor. The exploitation of the author was
embedded in the intellectual property regime from its inception.

There are important differences between intellectual property and physical
property. Physical property is scarce and finite, while intellectual property
can be copied, often costs almost nothing to reproduce, and can be used
simultaneously by anyone with a copy. It is exactly this characteristic of
unlimited reproducibility that requires the copyright regime to make
information into property. In the long term, the exchange value of any
reproducible good is driven towards its reproduction cost by competition. Since
there are few barriers to reproducing an information asset, it can have no
exchange value beyond the labor and resources required to reproduce it. In
other words, information has no long-term exchange value of its own. Thus,
owners of this property (again, not to be confused with the producers) need
laws to prevent this reproduction. 

Only by making it illegal for others to reproduce the information can owners
extract rent for the right to copy. Intellectual property, including copyright,
is an extension of the structure of property to immaterial assets and
information. Copyright is a legal construction that tries to make certain kinds
of immaterial wealth behave like material wealth so that they can be owned,
controlled, and traded.

In any system of property, musicians can no more retain ownership of the
product of their labor than can workers at a textile sweatshop. The system of
private control of the means of publication, distribution, promotion and media
production ensures that artists and all other creative workers can earn no more
than their subsistence. Whether you are a biochemist, a musician, a software
engineer, or a filmmaker, you have signed over all your copyrights to property
owners before these rights have any real financial value, for no more than the
reproduction costs of your work.

Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, nineteenth century French socialist and the first
person to call himself an ‘anarchist’, famously argued that property is theft.
According to this logic, if property is theft, than intellectual property is
fraud. Property is theft not in a strictly legal sense, since the laws of the
liberal capitalist state are the foundations of property. Property is theft in
the philosophical sense, as in the Lockean concept of property as an extension
of self-ownership, meaning that it is intrinsically unjust to take what you
have not produced. Proudhon, like Thompson and Hodgskin before him, argues that
the owner of property has no legitimate claim to the product of those who put
their property to productive use.xxvii Without recourse to force, property
owners could not extract any more than the reproduction costs of the
instruments they contribute to the productive process. A capitalist class,
then, could not exist without denying workers independent access to the means
of production. 

In the words of American Individualist Anarchist Benjamin Tucker, ‘the lender
of capital is entitled to its return intact, and nothing more’.xxviii Since
common lands were previously not property, when the peasants of the
pre-industrial age were denied access to common land by new enclosures, it can
be said that their land was stolen. Furthermore, because they were forced into
wage labor as a result of this expropriation, the institution of property
itself is an institution of theft.

But if physical property can be stolen, can intelligence or ideas be stolen? If
your land is stolen, you cannot use it anymore, except on the conditions set by
its new private owner. If ownership of an idea is analogous to the ownership of
material property, it should be subject to the same conditions of economic
exchange, forfeiture, and seizure. And if seized, it would then cease to be the
property of its owner. But if your idea is used by others, you have not lost
your ability to use it, so what is really stolen? The traditional notion of
property, as something that can be possessed to the exclusion of others, is
irreconcilable with something as intangible as an idea. Unlike a material
object, which can exist in only one place at a given time, ideas are infinite
and non-exclusive. A poem is no less a poet’s poem, despite its existence in
the memories of a thousand others.

Every expression is an extension of a previous perception. Ideas are not
original, they are built upon layers of knowledge accumulated throughout
history. Out of these common layers artists create works that have their
unmistakable specificities and innovations. All creative works reassemble
ideas, words, and images from history and their contemporary context. Before
the 18th century, poets quoted their ancestors and sources of inspiration
without formal acknowledgement, and playwrights freely borrowed plots and
dialogue from previous sources without attribution. Homer based the ‘Iliad’ and
the ‘Odyssey’ on oral traditions that dated back centuries. Virgil’s ‘Aeneid’
is lifted heavily from Homer. Shakespeare borrowed many of his narrative plots
and dialogue from Holinshed. 

This is not to say that the concept of plagiarism didn’t exist before the 18th
century, but its definition shifted radically. The term plagiarist (literally,
kidnapper) was first used by Martial in the 1st century to describe someone who
kidnapped his poems by copying them whole and circulating them under the
copier’s name. Plagiarism was a false assumption of another’s work. But if a
new work had similar passages or identical expressions to earlier ones, it was
not considered such a false assumption, as long as the new work had its own
aesthetic merits. After the invention of the creative genius, practices of
collaboration, appropriation and transmission were actively forgotten. The
accusations of plagiarism directed at Coleridge, Stendhall, Wilde and T.S.
Eliot for including expressions from their predecessors in their works
reflected a modern redefinition of the term in accordance with modern notions
of authorship and exclusive property.

Ideas are viral. They couple with other ideas, change shape, and migrate into
unfamiliar territories. Regimes of intellectual property restrict the
promiscuity of ideas and trap them in artificial enclosures, extracting
exclusive benefits from their ownership and control.  Intellectual property is
fraud, a legal privilege to falsely represent oneself as the sole ‘owner’ of an
idea, expression or technique and to charge a tax to all who want to perceive,
express or apply this ‘property’ in their own productive practice. It is not
plagiarism that dispossesses an ‘owner’ of using an idea, it is intellectual
property, backed by the invasive violence of a state that dispossesses everyone
from the use of their common culture. 

The basis for this dispossession is the legal fiction of the author as a
sovereign individual who creates original works out of the wellspring of his
imagination and thus has a natural and exclusive right to ownership. Foucault
unmasked authorship as a functional principle that impedes the free
circulation, manipulation, composition, decomposition, and re-composition of
knowledge.xxix The author-function represents a form of despotism over the
proliferation of ideas. The effect of this despotism, and of the system of
intellectual property that it shelters and preserves, is that it robs us of our
cultural memory, censors our words, and chains our imagination to the law. And
yet artists continue to be flattered by their association with the myth of the
creative genius, turning a blind eye to how it is used to justify their
exploitation and expand the privilege of the property-owning elite. 

Copyright pits author against author in a war of competition for originality.
Its effects are not just economic; copyright also naturalizes a certain process
of knowledge production, de-legitimizes the notion of a common culture, and
cripples social relations. Artists are not encouraged to share their thoughts,
expressions and works, or to contribute to a common pool of creativity.
Instead, they are compelled to jealously guard their ‘property’ from others who
they view as potential competitors, spies and thieves lying in wait to snatch
and defile their original ideas. This is a vision of the art world created in
capitalism’s own image, a capitalism that seeks to appropriate the alienated
products of its intellectual and creative workers.

Joost Smiers, Professor Emeritus of Political Science of the Arts at the
Utrecht School of the Arts, is among those who insist on the abolition of
copyright. He argues that copyright centralizes media ownership by giving large
media conglomerates an anti-competitive advantage that damages the position of
artists. Artists would gain more from a level playing field consisting of a
larger number of publishers competing for their services, than from the
exclusivity of copyright.xxx Professor Smiers has a valid point regarding the
market inefficiency of copyright. Copyright should be abolished. However, there
is no reason to believe it will be abolished. 

Copyright is far from the only market inefficiency in the contemporary
capitalist market. Without market inefficiencies, capital would be unable to
capture any more than its own reproduction cost in any branch of industry. The
elimination of competition is central to the logic of capitalism. Without
unfair advantages, a capitalist class of owners could not accumulate wealth and
there could be no capitalism. Smiers is correct in his criticism of copyright,
he is also correct when he goes further and denounces copyright as a form of
censorship. However as with all political ideas, the abolition of copyright can
only be implemented when those who support it can overcome the wealth of those
who oppose it. This is not currently the case.

The private ownership of ideas over the last two centuries has not managed to
eradicate the memory of a common culture, or the recognition that knowledge
flourishes when ideas, words, sounds and images are free for everyone to use.
Ever since the birth of the proprietary author, different individuals and
groups have challenged the intellectual property regime and the ‘right’ it gave
to some private individuals to ‘own’ creative works while preventing others
from using and re-interpreting them. 

In his 1870 ‘Poesies’, a pair of texts discovered and revered by Surrealists
Louis Aragon and André Breton, Uruguayan-born French poet Comte de Lautreamont
called for a return of impersonal poetry, a poetry written by all.  ‘Plagiarism
is necessary’, Lautreamont stated, ‘progress depends on it. It sticks close to
an author&#39;s phrase, uses his expressions, deletes a false idea, replaces it
with a true one’.xxxi His definition subverted the myth of individual
creativity used to justify property relations, in the name of progress, where
the myth of individual creativity in fact impeded progress through the
privatization of culture. The natural response was to re-appropriate culture as
a sphere of collective production without acknowledging artificial enclosures
of authorship. Lautremont’s phrase became a benchmark for the 20th century
avant-gardes. Dada rejected originality and portrayed all artistic production
as recycling and reassembling, from Duchamp’s ready-mades to Tzara’s rule for
making poems from cut-up newspapers, to the photomontages of Höch, Hausmann and
Heartfield. Dada also challenged the idea of the artist as solitary genius, and
of art as a separate sphere, by working collectively to not only produce art
objects and texts, but also media hoaxes, interventions at political gatherings
and demonstrations on the street. Its assault on artistic values was a revolt
against the capitalist foundations that created them.

The ideas of Dadaism were systematically developed into a theory by the
Situationist International (SI). The SI acknowledged that the practice of
detournement, putting existing artworks, films, advertisements and comic strips
through a detour, or recoding their dominant meanings, was indebted to Dadaist
practices, but with a difference. They saw Dada as a negative critique of
dominant images (one that depended on the easy recognition of the image being
negated) and defined detournement as a positive reuse of existing fragments
simply as elements in the production of a new work. Detournement was not
primarily an antagonism to tradition; rather, it emphasized the reinvention of
a new world from the scraps of the old. And implicitly, revolution was not
primarily an insurrection against the past but a way of learning to live in a
different way by creating new practices and forms of behavior. These forms of
behavior included collective writings, which were often unsigned, and an
explicit refusal of the copyright regime by attaching the labels ‘no copyright’
or ‘anticopyright’ to their works, along with the directions for use, such as:
any of the texts in this book may be freely reproduced, translated or adapted
even without mentioning the source.

Digitalization has proven to be much more of a threat to conventional notions
of authorship and intellectual property than the plagiarism practiced by
radical artists, or critiques of the author by poststructuralist theorists. The
computer dissolves the boundaries essential for the modern fiction of the
author as a solitary creator of unique and original works. Ownership
presupposes a separation between texts, and between the author and reader. The
artificiality of this separation is becoming more apparent. On mailing lists,
newsgroups and open publishing sites, the transition from reader to writer is
natural, and the difference between original texts vanishes as readers
contribute commentary and incorporate fragments of the original in their
response without the use of quotations. Attempts to copyright online writing
appear increasingly absurd, as such, texts are often collectively produced and
immediately multiplied. As online information circulates without regard for the
conventions of copyright, the concept of the proprietary author really seems to
have become a ghost of the past. Perhaps the most important effect of
digitalization is that it threatens the traditional benefactors of intellectual
property since monopolistic control by book publishers, music labels and the
film industry is no longer necessary as ordinary people are taking up the means
of production and distribution for themselves.

The Creative Anti-Commons

## Los anti-comunes creativos

The emergence of free software, file sharing, and art forms based upon sampling
and reuse of other media has created a serious problem for the traditional
copyright system. The music and film industries, in particular, are in the
middle of what basically amounts to an all-out war against their own consumers
to prevent them from downloading and sampling their property, their copyrights.
It is clear that digital network technologies poses a serious problem for the
recording and film industries. Dissent from copyright restrictions has had a
rich history among avant-garde artists, zine producers, radical musicians, and
the subcultural fringe. Today, the fight against intellectual property is led
by lawyers, professors and members of government. Not only is the social strata
to which the leading players belong very different, a fact that, in itself
might not be such a particularly important detail, but the framework for the
struggle against intellectual property has completely changed. 

Before law professors like Lawrence Lessig became interested in intellectual
property, the discourse among dissidents was against any ownership of the
commons, intellectual or physical. Now, supporters of property and economic
privilege occupy centre stage. The argument is no longer that the author is a
fiction and that property is theft, but that intellectual property law needs to
be restrained and reformed because it now infringes upon the rights of
creators. Lessig criticizes the recent changes in copyright legislation imposed
by global media corporations and their powerful lobbies, the absurd lengths to
which copyright has been extended, and other perversions that restrict the
creativity of artists. But he does not question copyright as such, since he
views it as the most important incentive for artists to create. The objective
here is to defend against intellectual property extremism, and absolutism,
while preserving its beneficial effects. 

In his keynote at Wizards of OS4 in Berlin, Lessig celebrated the read-write
culture of free sharing and collaborative authorship that has been the norm for
most of history. During the last century, as Lessig explained, this read-write
culture has been thwarted by intellectual property legislation and converted to
a read-only culture, dominated by a regime of producer-control.xxxii Lessig
bemoans the recent travesties of copyright law that have censored the work of
remix artists like DJ Danger Mouse (The Grey Album) and Javier Prato (Jesus
Christ: The Musical). Both artists were torpedoed by the legal owners of the
music used in the production of their works, as were John Oswald and
Negativland before them. In these cases, the wishes of the artists, rendered
here as mere consumers in the eyes of the law, were subordinated to control by
the producers - the Beatles and Gloria Gaynor, respectively - and their legal
representatives. The problem is that producer-control is creating a read-only
culture and destroying the vibrancy and diversity of creative production. It is
promoting the narrow interests of a few privileged ‘producers’ at the expense
of everybody else.

Lessig contrasts producer-control to the cultural commons (a common stock of
value that all can use and contribute to). The commons denies producer-control
and insists on the freedom of consumers. The ‘free’ in free culture refers to
the natural freedom of consumers to use common cultural stock, and not the
state-enforced freedom of producers to control the use of ‘their’ work. In
principle, the notion of a cultural commons abolishes the distinction between
producers and consumers, viewing them as equal actors in an ongoing process.

Today, within the context of the Creative Commons (CC) project more
specifically, Lessig claims that the possibility of a read-write culture is
reborn. But is the Creative Commons really a commons? According to its website,
Creative Commons defines the spectrum of possibilities between full copyright
(all rights reserved) and the public domain (no rights reserved). Creative
Commons also offers licenses that help you keep your copyright while inviting
certain uses of your work, a ‘some rights reserved’ copyright. The point is
clear: Creative Commons exists to help ‘you’, the producer, keep control of
‘your’ work. You are invited to choose from among a range of restrictions you
wish to apply to ‘your’ work, such as forbidding duplication, forbidding
derivative works, or forbidding commercial use. It is assumed that, as an
author-producer, everything you make and everything you say is your property.
The right of the consumer is not mentioned, nor is the distinction between
producers and consumers of culture disputed. Creative Commons legitimizes,
rather than denies, producer-control and enforces, rather than abolishes, the
distinction between producer and consumer. It expands the legal framework for
producers to deny consumers the possibility to create use-value or
exchange-value out of the common stock.

This problem of creating ‘commons deeds’ for works that are not really a common
stock is typical of the copy-just-right approach typified by the Creative
Commons. Had the Beatles and Gloria Gaynor published their work within the
framework of Creative Commons, it would still be their choice, and not the
choice of DJ Danger Mouse or Javier Patro, whether The Grey Album or Jesus
Christ: The Musical should be allowed to exist. The legal representatives of
the Beatles and Gloria Gaynor could just as easily have used CC licenses to
enforce their control over the use of their work. The very problem of
producer-control presented by Lessig is not solved by the Creative Commons
‘solution’ as long as the producer has an exclusive right to choose the level
of freedom to grant the consumer, a right that Lessig has never questioned. The
Creative Commons mission of allowing producers the ‘freedom’ to choose the
level of restrictions for publishing their work contradicts the real conditions
of commons-based production. Lessig has no basis to use DJ Danger Mouse and
Javier Patro as examples to promote the cause of Creative Commons.

Likewise, Lessig’s praise of the free software movement rings false, because
its architecture assures everyone (technologically as well as legally, in the
form of its licenses) the possibility of using the common resource of the
source code. Despite its claim to be extending the principles of the free
software movement, the freedom Creative Commons gives to creators to choose how
their works are used is very different from the freedom the General Public
License, invented by free software guru Richard Stallman, gives to users to
copy, modify and distribute the software as long as the same freedom is passed
down. Stallman recently made a statement rejecting Creative Commons in its
entirety, because some of its licenses are free while others are non-free,
arguing that this confuses people into mistaking the common label for something
substantial, when in fact there is no common standard and no ethical position
behind the label.xxxiii 

Whereas copyleft claims ownership legally, only to relinquish it practically,
the references to ownership by Creative Commons are genuine, not ironic.
Creative Commons’ pick-and-choose licenses allow arbitrary restrictions on the
freedom of users based on an author’s particular preferences and tastes. In
this sense, Creative Commons is a more elaborate version of copyright. It
doesn’t challenge the copyright regime as a whole, nor does it preserve its
legal shell in order to turn the practice of copyright on its head, as copyleft
does.

The public domain, anticopyright and copyleft are all attempts to create a
commons, a shared space of non-ownership that is free for everyone to use. The
conditions of use may differ, according to various interpretations of rights
and responsibilities, but these rights are common rights, and the resources are
shared alike by the whole community. Their use is not granted arbitrarily on a
case-by-case basis according to the whims of individual members, such as with
the Creative Commons approach. The Creative Commons&#39; mixed bag of cultural
goods is not held in common, because it is the choice of individual authors to
permit their use, or to deny it. Thus, Creative Commons is an anti-commons that
peddles a capitalist logic of privatization under a deliberately misleading
name. Its purpose is to help the owners of ‘intellectual property’ catch up
with the fast pace of information exchange, not by freeing information, but by
providing more sophisticated definitions for various shades of ownership and
producer-control.

What began as a movement for the abolition of intellectual property has become
a movement of customizing owners’ licenses. Almost without notice, what was
once a threatening movement of radicals, hackers and pirates is now the domain
of reformists, revisionists, and apologists for capitalism. When capital is
threatened, it co-opts its opposition. We have seen this scenario many times
throughout history. Indeed, one of the most spectacular examples of such a
co-optation is the transformation of self-organized workers’ councils into a
trade union movement that negotiates legal contracts with the owners of
corporations. The Creative Commons is a similar subversion that does not
question the ‘right’ to private property, but tries instead to get small
concessions in a playing field where the game and its rules are determined in
advance. The real effect of Creative Commons is to narrow political
contestation within the sphere of the already permissible.

While narrowing this field of contestation, Creative Commons simultaneously
portrays itself as radical, as the avant-garde of the battle against
intellectual property. Creative Commons has become a kind of default orthodoxy
in non-commercial licensing, and a popular cause among artists and
intellectuals who consider themselves generally on the left, and against the
intellectual property regime in particular. 

The Creative Commons label is moralistically invoked on countless sites, blogs,
speeches, essays, artworks and pieces of music as if it constituted the
necessary and sufficient condition for the coming revolution of a truly ‘free
culture’. Creative Commons is part of a larger copyfight movement, which is
defined as a fight to abolish ‘intellectual property’ and return to the mythic
principles of pre-corrupted copyright law that ‘genuinely’ sought to protect
authors&#39; rights. The individuals and groups associated with this movement
advocate what has been called a ‘smarter intellectual property’ or a reform of
intellectual property that doesn’t threaten free speech, democracy,
competition, innovation, education, the progress of science, and other things
that are critically important to our social, cultural, and economic well-being.

In an uncanny repetition of the copyright struggles that first emerged during
the period of Romanticism, the excesses of the capitalist form of intellectual
property are opposed through using capital’s own language and presuppositions.
Creative Commons preserves Romanticism’s ideas of originality, creativity and
property rights, and similarly considers ‘free culture’ to be a separate sphere
existing in splendid isolation from the world of material production. Ever
since the 18th century, the ideas of ‘creativity’ and ‘originality’ have been
inextricably linked to an anti-commons of knowledge. Creative Commons is no
exception. This view of the copyfight movement, a movement that includes
Creative Commons, is inconsistent with the idea of ‘free’ in the history of
free culture. For instance, the journal Internationale Situationniste, existing
between the late 1950s and early 1970s, was published with the following
copyright statement: ‘All texts published in Internationale Situationniste may
be freely reproduced, translated or adapted, even without indication of
origin’.xxxiv

Even earlier, in a 1930’s Woody Guthrie songbook distributed to listeners who
wanted the words to his recordings, the following note was included: 

This song is Copyrighted in U.S., under Seal of Copyright #154085, for a period
of 28 years, and anybody caught singin’ it without our permission, will be
mighty good friends of ours, cause we don’t give a dern. Publish it. Write it.
Sing it. Swing to it. Yodel it. We wrote it, that’s all we wanted to do.xxxv

In these cases, what is evident is that the freedom insisted upon is the
freedom of the consumer to use and produce, not the ‘freedom’ of the producer
to control. If free culture is really intended to create a common stock for
cultural peer production, then the framework provided must specifically be
designed in such a way that it cannot be used to attack free culture. The terms
presented by Woody Guthrie and the Situationist International pass this test.
The Creative Commons does not. Moreover, proponents of free culture must be
firm in denying the right of producer-control and denying the enforcement of a
distinction between producer and consumer. 

## Software Libre: El copyright se come a sí mismo

If copyable information is made scarce only by law, it can also be made
abundant by law. The practice of using copyright law itself as a form of
dissent against copyright, called copyleft, grew to prominence in software
development and in the rise of the free software community.

The General Public License (GPL) was the first copyleft license under which a
large amount of free software has been released. Its inventor Richard Stallman
claims that in the age of the digital copy, the role of copyright has been
completely reversed. While it began as a legal measure to allow authors to
restrict publishers for the sake of the general public, copyright has become a
publisher’s weapon to maintain their monopoly by imposing restrictions on a
general public that now has the means to produce their own copies. The aim of
copyleft more generally, and of specific licenses like the GPL, is to reverse
this reversal.

Copyleft uses copyright law, but flips it over to serve the opposite of its
usual purpose. Instead of fostering privatization, it becomes a guarantee that
everyone has the freedom to use, copy, distribute and modify software or any
other work. Its only ‘restriction’ is precisely the one that guarantees
freedom, and that users are not permitted to restrict anyone else’s freedom
since all copies and derivations must be redistributed under the same license.
Copyleft claims ownership legally, only to relinquish it practically, by
allowing everyone to use the work as they choose as long as the copyleft is
passed down. The merely formal claim of ownership means that no one else may
put a copyright over a work that has a copyleft, to try and limit its use.

Copyleft licenses guarantee intellectual property freedom by requiring that the
reuse and redistribution of information is governed by ‘the four freedoms’ of
the Free Software Foundation. These are the freedoms to use, study, modify and
redistribute.xxxvi Seen in its historical context, copyleft lies somewhere
between copyright and anticopyright. The gesture by writers of anticopyrighting
their works was made in a spirit of generosity, affirming that knowledge can
flourish only when it has no owners. As a declaration of ‘no rights reserved’,
anticopyright was a perfect slogan launched in an imperfect world. The
assumption was that others would be using the information in the same spirit of
generosity. But corporations learned to exploit the lack of copyright and
redistribute works for a profit. 

Stallman came up with the idea of copyleft in 1984 after a company made
improvements to software he had placed in the public domain (the technical
equivalent of anticopyright, but without the overt gesture of critique),
privatized the source code and refused to share the new version. So in a sense,
copyleft represents a coming-of-age, a painful lesson that relinquishing all
rights can lead to abuse by profiteers. Copyleft attempts to create a commons
based on reciprocal rights and responsibilities; those who want to share common
resources have certain ethical obligations to respect the rights of other
users. Everyone can add to the commons, but no one may subtract from it.

But in another sense copyleft represents a step back from anticopyright, and is
plagued by a number of contradictions. Stallman’s position is in agreement with
a widespread consensus that copyright has been perverted into a tool that
benefits corporations rather than the authors for whom it was originally
intended. But importantly, no such golden age of copyright exists. Copyright
has always been a legal tool. By coupling texts to authors, it transformed
ideas into commodities to turn a profit for the owners of capital. 

This specific myopia about copyright is part of a more general non-engagement
with economic questions. The ‘left’ in copyleft resembles a vague sort of
libertarianism opposed to closed, nontransparent systems and totalitarian
restrictions on access to information, rather than economic privilege or the
exploitation of labor. Copyleft emerged out of a hacker ethic that comes
closest to the pursuit of knowledge for knowledge’s sake. Its main objective is
defending freedom of information against restrictions imposed by ‘the system’,
which in part explains why there’s such a wide range of political opinions
among hackers. It also explains why the commonality that links hackers together
- the ‘left’ in Stallman’s vision of copyleft - is not the left as it is
understood by most political activists.

The GPL and copyleft is frequently invoked as an example of the free software
movement’s anticommercial bias. But there is no such bias. The four freedoms
required by the GPL means that any additional restriction, like a
non-commercial clause, would designate the work as non-free even if it complies
with some of the freedoms. Keeping software ‘free’ does not prevent developers
from selling copies they’ve modified with their own labor, and it also does not
prevent redistribution by a commercial company that charges a fee, as long as
the same license is passed down and the source code remains transparent. 

This version of freedom does not abolish exchange, as some free software
enthusiasts have claimed, nor is it even incompatible with a capitalist economy
based on the theft of surplus value. The contradiction inherent in this commons
is partly due to the understanding of proprietary as synonymous with
closed-source or non-transparent. ‘Proprietary’ means having an owner who
prohibits access to information and keeps the source code secret, it does not
necessarily mean having an owner who extracts a profit, although keeping the
source code secret and extracting a profit often coincide in practice. As long
as the four conditions are met, commercial redistribution of free software is
non-proprietary.

Virtually every office, every academy, and every factory relies on software in
their day-to-day work. For all these organizations, the use-value of software
can be directly translated into exchange-value in the course of their normal
production, not by selling the software directly, but by doing whatever
business they do, selling whatever product they sell, and using software to
increase their productivity. Paying for software licenses and agreeing to the
restrictive terms of such licenses is not in their interests. As a comparison
to what David Ricardo said regarding landlords, the interest of a software
company like Microsoft is always opposed to the interest of every software
user. 

The organizations that use software, namely schools, factories, offices, and
e-commerce enterprises, collectively employ far more software developers within
their organizations than the few companies who sell proprietary software, such
as Microsoft. Thus, free software is very attractive to these organizations as
it allows them to reduce their individual development costs by collectively
maintaining a common stock of software assets. Thus, the use-value of free
software is valued by organizations that can and do pay software developers to
make it, even though they have no exclusive copyright on it. In endorsing free
software and copyleft in order to reduce their own costs of production,
technology giants like IBM have much in common with liberal capitalists like
David Ricardo, who worked to overcome the advantages landlords had over
capitalists through, for instance, working to lower the price of their means of
production.

Yet free software was not conceived as merely a way to reduce the cost of
corporate software development. Richard Stallman writes on his organization’s
website: ‘My work on free software is motivated by an idealistic goal:
spreading freedom and co-operation. I want to encourage free software to
spread, replacing proprietary software that forbids co-operation, and thus make
our society better’.xxxvii However, since free software cannot directly capture
exchange value, producers of free software must still sell their labor to
provide for their material subsistence. Copyleft is thus not able to ‘make
society better’ in any material sense, as the majority of the exchange value
created by producers of free software is captured by owners of material
property who are able to provide for their subsistence. As copyleft cannot
allow workers to accumulate wealth beyond customary subsistence, copyleft alone
cannot change the distribution of productive assets or their output. Therefore
copyleft has no direct impact on the distribution of wealth and power.

Not all free software is copyleft. All software licensed under the terms that
provide the four freedoms of the Free Software Foundation is free software.
Software is copyleft when, in addition, it proscribes that all derivative works
also pass on these freedoms. The question then must be asked, to what degree
copyleft really does benefit the free software movement? 

Despite examples such as Stallman’s formative experience, when his public
domain software was appropriated and privatized in 1984, there are also ample
counter examples of large-scale free software projects that continue to employ
licenses that allow proprietary redistribution, such as various BSD-based
operating systems and the hugely popular Apache web server. While a corporation
can employ code from these projects in proprietary applications, it does so at
a cost. By separating their development from the main free software project,
they have to manually patch or re-implement code improvements from the free
distribution into their own fork, and forgo help from the free software
community in improving their own proprietary contributions. This means that
companies that chose to make proprietary versions of free software need a
strong business reason to do so. In practice then, this rarely happens, as
proprietary versions tend to quickly fall behind the free software versions in
functionality and thus lose their market value.

The most successful examples of proprietary use of free software comes from
companies whose primary business is selling hardware, not software, such as
Apple Computer or Juniper routers, both of which run proprietary versions of
software derived from BSD-based projects. It should be noted that both Apple
and Juniper make their software proprietary not to sell software, but to bundle
it with their expensive hardware. This point is emphasized by the efforts of
both companies to stop users from legally buying the software to run on cheaper
commodity hardware. For example, consider Apple&#39;s efforts to thwart the
Hackintosh project which offers instructions on getting Mac operating systems
onto unsupported computers, as well as legal action against companies selling
non-Apple hardware preloaded with legally purchased copies of its OS X.xxxviii 

Examples like this demonstrate the emphasis on freedom embedded within
copyleft. Apple’s actions have not threatened the BSD-based free software
projects they have drawn from. In fact, Apple has contributed to these
projects. However, the terms of the BSD-style license allows Apple to add
restrictions that enable them to control their users and deny their freedom in
using their legally purchased software as they please. They would not have such
an option if their operating system was based on copyleft licensed software
such as Linux, which is published under the GPL.

Just as copyleft is in some ways a retreat from the ideological position of
anticopyright, the political position of copyleft is very much a retreat from
the ideological position of the socialist left. Even when it appropriates
arguments against property from the left, copyleft limits the critiques to the
narrow field of immaterial property. A particularly shameless example of this
is Eben Moglen’s ‘dot Communist Manifesto’,xxxix an insulting pastiche of Marx
and Engels’ seminal manifesto, that invokes the 1848 call to arms for the
working class to unite towards the abolition of capitalism only to instead
demand for the abolition of intellectual property alone. The two 19th-century
materialists would have understood that abolishing intellectual property would
not free the working class of their chains. Moglen, Columbia University law
professor and chief counsel for Stallman’s Free Software Foundation, fails to
engage with the issue of the institution of property itself, and thus has
learned nothing from the position of the revolutionaries he smugly mimics.

Yet, despite the ideological and political retreats that copyleft represents,
in the area of software development, copyleft has proved to be a tremendously
effective means of creating an information commons that broadly benefits all
those whose production depends on it. Indeed, the rise of the free software
movement is rightly an inspiration to all who strive towards more equitable
forms of producing. 

The socialist left promotes the idea that wealth must be more justly and
equitably shared and controlled by the people who produce it. Perhaps the best
method of achieving this is through decentralized, worker-owned enterprises,
co-operatives, and councils. For the same reason that capitalist organizations
support free software, because it represents a common stock of use value they
can apply to production, commons-based producers, and therefore all workers’
self-organized enterprises, can also benefit from such a common stock of
copyleft software and can incorporate software developers in their collective
enterprises. 

Free software is therefore valuable for workers’ self-organized production,
giving us a source of valuable capital, software that would have previously
been exclusively controlled by proprietary corporations allowing us a
possibility to retain a greater portion of the product of our labor. Perhaps
just as important as retaining more of the product of our labor is the way the
software community pioneers co-operatively organized large scale distributed
projects, bringing together internationally dispersed contributors working
towards the development of valuable software. In this way, the free software
movement makes important contributions towards the goal of ‘organizing
industrially [and] forming the structure of the new society within the shell of
the old’, the historic ideal of the Industrial Workers of the World.xl

## La Cultura Libre necesita una Sociedad Libre: El copyfarleft

Despite copyleft’s beneficial role in forming a valuable common stock of
software, it remains problematic when the model is retrofitted back to the
domains of art and culture from which dissent against intellectual property
sprung. Cultural works, unlike software, are a consumer good, not a tool for
use in production, or a producer’s good. Producer&#39;s goods, as mentioned
earlier, are the assets used in production, such as the tools and equipment
required to produce consumer goods sold for profit. Capital demand is distinct
from consumer demand. Capital demand is the demand for producer’s goods;
consumer demand is the demand for consumer goods. Capitalism doesn&#39;t
require that a profit be made on the production of capital goods because
profits are made through the control of the circulation of consumer goods.
Anything that decreases the cost of capital consequently increases the
potential profit that can be captured through the sale of the goods. Failure to
understand the difference between capital demand and consumer demand propagates
the myth that the success of free software can be a template for free culture.
Under capitalism, only capital can be free. That&#39;s why software can be
free, but culture cannot be free without more fundamental shifts in society.

Art is not, in most cases, a common input to production as software is. Thus,
the demand for it is consumer demand, not capital demand. There are certainly
cases in which artworks could be considered productive inputs, such as sound
effects, clip art, music clips, and the like, and the tradition of artists
drawing on the work of their predecessors has been discussed at length above;
however, when we discuss the economics of content-based works, like poems,
novels, films, or music, as well as entertainment-oriented software titles such
as games, we are not talking about producer’s goods, but consumer’s goods.
Capitalist publishing firms and entertainment industry giants will support the
creation of copyleft software in order to employ it in production. However, in
most cases, they will not support the creation of copyleft art. Why would they,
as art is a consumer good, and the industry is not in the business of giving
away consumer goods for free. They are in the business, however, of earning
profits by controlling the distribution of consumer goods. 

Like all copyable, reproducible information, content-based works have no direct
exchange value, and, unlike software, they rarely have use value in production
either. Use value exists only among the fans of these works, and, if owners of
property cannot charge these fans money for the right to copy, why would they
fund the production? And if owners of property will not support copyleft art,
which is freely distributed, who will? The answer is unclear. In some cases,
institutions such as private and state cultural funds will, but these can only
support a very small number of artists, and only then by employing dubious and
ultimately somewhat arbitrary selection criteria in deciding who does, and who
does not, receive such funding.

The problem is obvious when attempting to translate copyleft to cultural works.
If someone releases a novel under a copyleft license, and Random House prints
it and makes a profit off the author’s work, Random House has not violated
copyleft as long as the copyleft is passed down. To be ‘free’ means to be open
to commercial appropriation, since freedom, in the terms of copyleft, is
defined as the non-restrictive circulation of information rather than as
freedom from exploitation. It comes as no surprise that the major revision in
applying copyleft to the production of artworks, music, and texts has been to
permit copying, modifying and redistributing as long as it is non-commercial. 

Wu Ming, a group of anti-intellectual property authors from Italy, claim it is
necessary to place a restriction on commercial use, or use for profit, in order
to prohibit the parasitic exploitation of cultural workers. They justify this
restriction, and its divergence from the General Public License version of
copyleft, on the grounds that the struggle against exploitation and the fight
for a fair remuneration of labor is the cornerstone of the history of the left.
  Other content providers and book publishers, for example Verso, have expanded
  this restriction by claiming that copying, modifying and redistributing
  should not only be non-profit, but also in the spirit of the original,
  without explaining what this ‘spirit’ means. 

Indymedia Romania revised its copyleft definition to make the meaning of ‘in
the spirit of the original’ clearer after repeated problems with the
neo-fascist site Altermedia Romania, whose ‘pranks’ ranged from hijacking the
indymedia.ro domain to copying texts from Indymedia and lying about names and
sources. Indymedia Romania’s restrictions include, not modifying the original
name or source because it goes against the desire for transparency, not
reproducing the material for profit because it abuses the spirit of generosity,
and not reproducing the material in a context that violates the rights of
individuals or groups by discriminating against them on the basis of
nationality, ethnicity, gender or sexuality because that contravenes its
commitment to equality.

Other versions of copyleft have tried to add further restrictions based on a
stronger interpretation of the ‘left’ in copyleft, based not on a negative
freedom from restrictions but on positive principles, like valuing social
co-operation above profit, non-hierarchical participation, and
non-discrimination. The more restrictive definitions of copyleft attempt to
found an information commons that is not just about the free flow of
information, but sees itself as part of a larger social movement that bases its
commonality on shared leftist principles. In its various mutations, copyleft
represents a pragmatic, rational approach that recognizes the limits of freedom
as implying reciprocal rights and responsibilities. These different
restrictions represent divergent interpretations about what these rights and
responsibilities should be. Yet, given the poor economic conditions of the
majority of artists who reserve full copyright, the prospect of non-commercial
mutations of copyleft improving the economic conditions of artists seems
remote. 

The chief advantage of reserving commercial rights as an artist is the ability
to license work to the entertainment industry under other terms; as it is
commercial, it doesn’t qualify for free access under the terms of a
non-commercial license. However, artists lack the resources to manufacture and
distribute on a commercial scale. Thus, they are in fact reliant on those who
have the capital to do so, and cannot bargain for anything more than their
subsistence. In essence, selling their ideas is like other workers selling
their labor. This is illustrated in ‘Music Artists’ Earnings and Digitisation:
A Review of Empirical Data from Britain and Germany’ by Martin Kretschmer,
Professor of Information Jurisprudence at Bournemouth University, where he
concludes that ‘the creator has little to gain from exclusivity’.xli Similarly,
in his 2006 study ‘Empirical Evidence On Copyright Earnings’, Kretschmer
states: ‘Earnings from non-copyright, and even non-artistic activities, are an
important source of income for most creators’.xlii This study includes many
startling figures. For example, the median payment distributed by the
Performing Right Society (UK) in 1994 to its copyright holders was £84.xliii

While non-commercial terms may provide a way to integrate artists who produce
free culture into an otherwise proprietary entertainment industry, they do not
challenge that proprietary entertainment industry or address the embedded
exploitation in it. Non-commercial terms are very problematic for those in the
socialist left who advocate for workers’ self-organized production, as these
terms restrict the ability of non-capitalist enterprises to reproduce such
works. Thus, such licenses are detrimental not only to the interests of artists
but to all workers, as they are not compatible with the general objective of
the socialist left: the creation of a worker-controlled economy. 

In order for copyleft to mutate into a revolutionary instrument in the domain
of cultural production, it must become ‘copy-far-left’. It must insist on
workers’ ownership of the means of production. The works themselves must be a
part of the common stock, and available for productive use by other
commons-based producers. So long as authors reserve the right to make money
with their works, and prevent other commons-based producers from doing so,
their work cannot be considered to be in the commons at all and remains a
private work.  A copyfarleft license must not restrict commercial usage, but
rather usage that is not based in the commons. 

Specifically, copyfarleft must have one set of rules for those who are working
within the context of workers’ communal ownership, and another for those who
employ private property and wage labor in production. A copyfarleft license
should make it possible for producers to share freely and to also retain the
value of their labor product. In other words, it must be possible for workers
to earn remuneration by applying their own labor to mutual property, but
impossible for owners of private property to make profit using wage labor. 

Thus, under a copyfarleft license, a worker-owned printing co-operative could
be free to reproduce, distribute, and modify the common stock as they like, but
a privately owned publishing company would be prevented from having free
access. In this way, copyfarleft remains free in the same sense as copyleft,
despite restrictions on proprietary redistribution. Copyfarleft only prohibits
subtraction from the commons, not contributions to it.

A copyfarleft license would allow commons-based commercial use while denying
the ability to profit by exploiting wage labor. The copyleft non-commercial
approach does neither, it prevents commons-based commerce, while not
effectively restricting wage exploitation which requires a change in the
distribution of wealth. Copyleft provides a solid foundation for software in
commons-based productions. Copyfarleft could potentially provide a workable
foundation for cultural works to also become part of the common stock employed
by independent producers. Only the promotion of a workers&#39; economy, not
simply the prevention of commercial use, can change the distribution of wealth.

However, for copyfarleft to have an impact, it would need to be employed within
the context of a nascent workers’ economy that includes various forms of
production, such as cultural and material (art as well as food, etc.). In the
absence of such an environment, copyleft and its various mutations have little
advantage for the majority of artists, for whom the prospects of gaining
financially by way of commercial licensing are negligible. For these artists,
anticopyright retains its strong appeal. Anticopyright is a gesture of being
radical that refuses pragmatic compromises and seeks to abolish intellectual
property in its entirety. Anticopyright affirms a freedom that is absolute and
recognizes no limits to its desire. 

While some mutations of copyleft have multiplied restrictions, others have
rejected any restriction at all, including the single restriction imposed by
the initial copyleft. It is the movement around peer-to-peer file sharing that
comes closest to the gesture of anticopyright. The best example is the Copyriot
blog by Rasmus Fleischer of Piratbyrån (Bureau of Piracy), an anti-intellectual
property think tank, and the one-time founders of Pirate Bay, the best-known
Bittorent site in the P2P community. The motto of Copyriot is ‘No copyright. No
license’. But there is a difference from the older anticopyright tradition.
Fleischer claims that copyright has become absurd in the age of digital
technology because it has to resort to all sorts of fictions, like distinctions
between uploading and downloading or between producer and consumer, which don’t
actually exist in horizontal peer-to-peer communication. 

Piratbyrån rejects copyright in its entirety, not because it was flawed in its
inception, but because it was invented to regulate an expensive, one-way
machine like the printing press, and no longer corresponds to the practices
that have been made possible by current technologies of reproduction. However,
despite the absurdity of the fictions on which copyright rests, the broader
political context suggests that copyleft-inspired models also have an important
role to play. The outright rejection of the legal environment is not always
possible when practical considerations are taken into account. Building
alternative ways of producing and sharing, ‘building the new society within the
shell of the old’, requires us to operate within the capitalist legal system
where the logic of capture and exploitation is embedded. While space for
defiant gestures exist, we must also get on with the business of finding the
forms and structures required to build and expand the commons. It seems clear
that restrictions such as those of copyleft and copyfarleft serve to protect
the commons and keep it free.

So long as copyright continues to exist, copyleft inspired licenses continue to
be needed in order to allow for intellectual freedom within the copyright
regime. Only when workers have achieved their historical role of creating a
society without classes, can we create a truly free culture without
restrictions.

Peer Production License: A Model for Copyfarleft

## La licencia de producción de pares: un modelo para el copyfarleft

Production License, a model for a copyfarleft license, has been derived from
the ‘Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike’ Creative Commons license:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/.

License

THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS COPYFARLEFT
PUBLIC LICENSE (&quot;LICENSE&quot;). THE WORK IS PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND
ALL OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS. ANY USE OF THE WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER
THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS PROHIBITED.

BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED IN THIS LICENSE, YOU AGREE TO BE
BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS LICENSE MAY BE
CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE
IN AS CONSIDERATION FOR ACCEPTING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS LICENSE AND
FOR AGREEING TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS LICENSE.

1. Definitions

a.	&quot;Adaptation&quot; means a work based upon the Work, or upon the Work
and 

other pre-existing works, such as a translation, adaptation, derivative work,
arrangement of music or other alterations of a literary or artistic work, or
phonogram or performance and includes cinematographic adaptations or any other
form in which the Work may be recast, transformed, or adapted including in any
form recognizably derived from the original, except that a work that
constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation for the purpose
of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical work,
performance or phonogram, the synchronization of the Work in timed-relation
with a moving image (&quot;synching&quot;) will be considered an Adaptation for
the purpose of this License. 

b.	&quot;Collection&quot; means a collection of literary or artistic works,
such as encyclopedias and anthologies, or performances, phonograms or
broadcasts, or other works or subject matter other than works listed in Section
1(f) below, which, by reason of the selection and arrangement of their
contents, constitute intellectual creations, in which the Work is included in
its entirety in unmodified form along with one or more other contributions,
each constituting separate and independent works in themselves, which together
are assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collection
will not be considered an Adaptation (as defined above) for the purposes of
this License. 

c.	&quot;Distribute&quot; means to make available to the public the original
and copies of the Work or Adaptation, as appropriate, through sale, gift or any
other transfer of possession or ownership. 

d.	&quot;Licensor&quot; means the individual, individuals, entity or entities
that offer(s) the Work under the terms of this License. 

e.	&quot;Original Author&quot; means, in the case of a literary or artistic
work, the individual, individuals, entity or entities who created the Work or
if no individual or entity can be identified, the publisher; and in addition
  (i) in the case of a performance the actors, singers, musicians, dancers, and
  other persons who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in, interpret or
  otherwise perform literary or artistic works or expressions of folklore; (ii)
  in the case of a phonogram the producer being the person or legal entity who
  first fixes the sounds of a performance or other sounds; and, (iii) in the
  case of broadcasts, the organization that transmits the broadcast. 

f.	&quot;Work&quot; means the literary and/or artistic work offered under the
terms of this License including without limitation any production in the
literary, scientific and artistic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of
its expression including digital form, such as a book, pamphlet and other
writing; a lecture, address, sermon or other work of the same nature; a
dramatic or dramatico-musical work; a choreographic work or entertainment in
dumb show; a musical composition with or without words; a cinematographic work
to which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to
cinematography; a work of drawing, painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving
or lithography; a photographic work to which are assimilated works expressed by
a process analogous to photography; a work of applied art; an illustration,
map, plan, sketch or three-dimensional work relative to geography, topography,
architecture or science; a performance; a broadcast; a phonogram; a compilation
of data to the extent it is protected as a copyrightable work; or a work
performed by a variety or circus performer to the extent it is not otherwise
considered a literary or artistic work. 

g.	&quot;You&quot; means an individual or entity exercising rights under this
License who has not previously violated the terms of this License with respect
to the Work, or who has received express permission from the Licensor to
exercise rights under this License despite a previous violation. 

h.	&quot;Publicly Perform&quot; means to perform public recitations of the
Work and to communicate to the public those public recitations, by any means or
process, including by wire or wireless means or public digital performances; to
make available to the public Works in such a way that members of the public may
access these Works from a place and at a place individually chosen by them; to
perform the Work to the public by any means or process and the communication to
the public of the performances of the Work, including by public digital
performance; to broadcast and rebroadcast the Work by any means including
signs, sounds or images. 

i.	&quot;Reproduce&quot; means to make copies of the Work by any means
including without limitation by sound or visual recordings and the right of
fixation and reproducing fixations of the Work, including storage of a
protected performance or phonogram in digital form or other electronic medium. 

2. Fair Dealing Rights. Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit,
or restrict any uses free from copyright or rights arising from limitations or
exceptions that are provided for in connection with the copyright protection
under copyright law or other applicable laws.3. License Grant. Subject to the
terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide,
royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the applicable
copyright) license to exercise the rights in the Work as stated below:

a.	to Reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more
Collections, and to Reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collections; 

b.	to create and Reproduce Adaptations provided that any such Adaptation,
including any translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly
label, demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to the original
Work. For example, a translation could be marked &quot;The original work was
translated from English to Spanish,&quot; or a modification could indicate
&quot;The original work has been modified.&quot;; 

c.	to Distribute and Publicly Perform the Work including as incorporated in
Collections; and, 

d.	to Distribute and Publicly Perform Adaptations. 

The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or
hereafter devised. The above rights include the right to make such
modifications as are technically necessary to exercise the rights in other
media and formats. Subject to Section 8(f), all rights not expressly granted by
Licensor are hereby reserved, including but not limited to the rights set forth
in Section 4(f).

4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made
subject to and limited by the following restrictions:

a.	You may Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work only under the terms of
this License. You must include a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier
(URI) for, this License with every copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly
Perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Work that restrict the
terms of this License or the ability of the recipient of the Work to exercise
the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the License. You may
not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all notices that refer to this
License and to the disclaimer of warranties with every copy of the Work You
Distribute or Publicly Perform. When You Distribute or Publicly Perform the
Work, You may not impose any effective technological measures on the Work that
restrict the ability of a recipient of the Work from You to exercise the rights
granted to that recipient under the terms of the License. This Section 4(a)
applies to the Work as incorporated in a Collection, but this does not require
the Collection apart from the Work itself to be made subject to the terms of
this License. If You create a Collection, upon notice from any Licensor You
must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Collection any credit as
required by Section 4(d), as requested. If You create an Adaptation, upon
notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the
Adaptation any credit as required by Section 4(d), as requested. 

b.	Subject to the exception in Section 4(c), you may not exercise any of the
rights granted to You in Section 3 above in any manner that is primarily
intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary
compensation. The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means of
digital file-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or
directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary compensation, provided
there is no payment of any monetary compensation in connection with the
exchange of copyrighted works. 

c.	You may exercise the rights granted in Section 3 for commercial purposes
only if:

i.	You are a worker-owned business or worker-owned collective; and

ii. 	all financial gain, surplus, profits and benefits produced by the 
    business or collective are distributed among the worker-owners

d.	Any use by a business that is privately owned and managed, and that seeks
to generate profit from the labor of employees paid by salary or other wages,
is not permitted under this license.

e.	If You Distribute, or Publicly Perform the Work or any Adaptations or
Collections, You must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section 4(a),
keep intact all copyright notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to the
medium or means You are utilizing: (i) the name of the Original Author (or
pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or if the Original Author and/or
Licensor designate another party or parties (e.g., a sponsor institute,
publishing entity, journal) for attribution (&quot;Attribution Parties&quot;)
in Licensor&#39;s copyright notice, terms of service or by other reasonable
means, the name of such party or parties; (ii) the title of the Work if
supplied; (iii) to the extent reasonably practicable, the URI, if any, that
Licensor specifies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does not
refer to the copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and, (iv)
consistent with Section 3(b), in the case of an Adaptation, a credit
identifying the use of the Work in the Adaptation (e.g., &quot;French
translation of the Work by Original Author,&quot; or &quot;Screenplay based on
original Work by Original Author&quot;). The credit required by this Section
4(d) may be implemented in any reasonable manner; provided, however, that in
the case of a Adaptation or Collection, at a minimum such credit will appear,
if a credit for all contributing authors of the Adaptation or Collection
  appears, then as part of these credits and in a manner at least as prominent
  as the credits for the other contributing authors. For the avoidance of
  doubt, You may only use the credit required by this Section for the purpose
  of attribution in the manner set out above and, by exercising Your rights
  under this License, You may not implicitly or explicitly assert or imply any
  connection with, sponsorship or endorsement by the Original Author, Licensor
  and/or Attribution Parties, as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work,
  without the separate, express prior written permission of the Original
  Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties. 

f.	For the avoidance of doubt:

i.	Non-waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which
the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing
scheme cannot be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect
such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this
License; 

ii.	Waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in which the
right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme
can be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect such
royalties for any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License if
Your exercise of such rights is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than
noncommercial as permitted under Section 4(b) and otherwise waives the right to
collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme; and, 

iii.	Voluntary License Schemes. The Licensor reserves the right to collect
royalties, whether individually or, in the event that the Licensor is a member
of a collecting society that administers voluntary licensing schemes, via that
society, from any exercise by You of the rights granted under this License that
is for a purpose or use which is otherwise than noncommercial as permitted
under Section 4(b). 

g.	Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Licensor or as may be
otherwise permitted by applicable law, if You Reproduce, Distribute or Publicly
Perform the Work either by itself or as part of any Adaptations or Collections,
You must not distort, mutilate, modify or take other derogatory action in
relation to the Work which would be prejudicial to the Original Author&#39;s
honor or reputation. Licensor agrees that in those jurisdictions (e.g. Japan),
in which any exercise of the right granted in Section 3(b) of this License (the
right to make Adaptations) would be deemed to be a distortion, mutilation,
modification or other derogatory action prejudicial to the Original
Author&#39;s honor and reputation, the Licensor will waive or not assert, as
appropriate, this Section, to the fullest extent permitted by the applicable
national law, to enable You to reasonably exercise Your right under Section
3(b) of this License (right to make Adaptations) but not otherwise. 

5. Representations, Warranties and DisclaimerUNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED
TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING, LICENSOR OFFERS THE WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO
REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS,
IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF
TITLE, MERCHANTIBILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR
THE ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF
ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE
EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO SUCH EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN
NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR ANY SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS
LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

7. Termination

a.	This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically
upon any breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities
who have received Adaptations or Collections from You under this License,
however, will not have their licenses terminated provided such individuals or
entities remain in full compliance with those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7,
and 8 will survive any termination of this License. 

b.	Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is
perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright in the Work).
Notwithstanding the above, Licensor reserves the right to release the Work
under different license terms or to stop distributing the Work at any time;
provided, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw this
License (or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted
under the terms of this License), and this License will continue in full force
and effect unless terminated as stated above. 

8. Miscellaneous

a.	Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work or a Collection, the
Licensor offers to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and
conditions as the license granted to You under this License. 

b.	Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation, Licensor offers
to the recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and
conditions as the license granted to You under this License. 

c.	If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under
applicable law, it shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the
remainder of the terms of this License, and without further action by the
parties to this agreement, such provision shall be reformed to the minimum
extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable. 

d.	No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach
consented to unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by
the party to be charged with such waiver or consent. 

e.	This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with
respect to the Work licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or
representations with respect to the Work not specified here. Licensor shall not
be bound by any additional provisions that may appear in any communication from
You. This License may not be modified without the mutual written agreement of
the Licensor and You. 

f.	The rights granted under, and the subject matter referenced, in this
License were drafted utilizing the terminology of the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (as amended on September 28, 1979),
the Rome Convention of 1961, the WIPO Copyright Treaty of 1996, the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty of 1996 and the Universal Copyright
Convention (as revised on July 24, 1971). These rights and subject matter take
effect in the relevant jurisdiction in which the License terms are sought to be
enforced according to the corresponding provisions of the implementation of
those treaty provisions in the applicable national law. If the standard suite
of rights granted under applicable copyright law includes additional rights not
granted under this License, such additional rights are deemed to be included in
the License; this License is not intended to restrict the license of any rights
under applicable law. 

Venture Communism and Copyfarleft

## El Comunismo de Riesgo y el Copyfarleft

‘The State is a condition, a certain relationship between human beings, a mode
of human behavior; we destroy it by contracting other relationships, by
behaving differently….’ - Gustav Landauerxliv 

Proposing an approach to class struggle based upon venture communism and
copyfarleft would be shocking to many revolutionaries due to the utilization of
joint stock corporations, bonds, rental agreements, copyright licenses and the
retention of the market exchange of the products of labor. Therefore, it must
be noted that venture communism and copyfarleft are only a means of class
struggle, not ideal goals in and of themselves. They are intended as a means of
organizing production towards the goal of building the economic capacity
required to engage in class conflict, and transform a capitalist system. In the
words of the Industrial Workers of the World ‘not only for everyday struggle
with capitalists, but also to carry on production when capitalism shall have
been overthrown. By organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the
new society within the shell of the old’.xlv 

Capitalism, a mode of production where the worker earns only subsistence while
property owners retain the remainder of the productive output, can only create
a society where the interests of the property owner will be reflected in the
social institutions, and the interests of subjugated producers. Both venture
communism and copyfarleft have, as their goal, the creation of a productive
commons that producers can use to accumulate mutual wealth, and thus work
towards realizing their historic role of creating a society free of economic
classes. 

As long as producers operate within the capitalist mode of production, they
cannot change society politically. Whatever wealth producers can apply to
influencing social institutions must come from the share of production they
retain, and thus will always be smaller than the share retained by the owners
who can use it to prevent change. When we employ a commons of productive
assets, which have no individual owners but are collectively owned, we retain
the wealth we create, and thus the possibility for a new society is within our
grasp.

References

Bell, Daniel. ‘The Subversion of Collective Bargaining’. Commentary. March, 1960.

‘Charter for Innovation, Creativity and Access to Knowledge 2.0.1. Charter for
Innovation, Creativity and Access to Knowledge ‘Introduction’.
http://fcforum.net/charter_extended. 

DaBlade, ‘Richard Stallman Interview’. P2Pnet News. February 6, 2006.
http://www.p2pnet.net/story/7840. 

developerWorks. ‘developerWorks Interviews: Tim Berners-Lee’. developerWorks 22
August 2006. http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/podcast/dwi/cmint082206txt.html. 

Graham, Paul. ‘What Business Can Learn From Open Source’. PaulGraham.com.
August 2005. http://www.paulgraham.com/opensource.html. 

Graham, Paul. ‘Web 2.0’. PaulGraham.com. November 2005.
http://www.paulgraham.com/web20.html. 

Industrial Workers of the World. ‘Preamble to the IWW Constitution’. Industrial
Workers of the World: A Union for All Workers.
http://www.iww.org/culture/official/preamble.shtml.

Keynes, John Maynard. ‘Chapter 2: The Postulates of the Classical Economics’.
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Marxists Internet
Archive.
http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/generaltheory/ch02.htm.
Originally published, Cambridge: Macmillan Cambridge University Press, 1936.

Khayati, Mustapha. ‘Captive Words: Preface to a Situationist Dictionary’.
Translated by Ken Knabb, International Situationiste 10 (1966). Situationist
International Online, http://www.cddc.vt.edu/sionline/index.html. 

Kretschmer, Martin. ‘Music Artists’ Earnings and Digitisation: A Review of
Empirical Data from Britain and Germany’. Bournemouth University Eprints.
http://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/3704/1/Birkbeck_06_04_final.pdf. 

Kretschmer, Martin. ‘Empirical Evidence on Copyright Earnings’. September,
2006. DIME. http://www.dime-eu.org/files/active/0/Kretschmer.pdf. 

Landauer, Gustav. Revolution and Other Writings: A Poltiical Reader. Edited and
translated by Gabriel Kuhn. Oakland: PM Press, 2010.

Lessig, Lawrence. Presentation at Wizards of OS 4: Information Freedom Rules
International Conference, Berlin, Germany September 14-16, 2006.

Macmillan, Fiona.  New Directions in Copyright Law.  Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar Publishing, 2007. 

Mandel, Ernest. ‘Historical Materialism and the Capitalist State’. Translated
by Juriaan Bendian. Scribd.com.
http://www.scribd.com/doc/20878564/MandelErnestHistorical-Materialism-and-the-Capitalist-State.
Originally published in German in Marxismus und Anthropologie, Bochum 1980.

Marx, Karl. ‘Preface’. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.
Marxists Internet Archive.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface.htm.
Originally written, 1859. 

Marx, Karl and Frederick Engels. Manifesto of the Communist Party.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/.
Originally published in German, 1848.

Mill, John Stuart. Principles of Political Economy with some of their
Application to Social Philosophy. Library of Economics and Liberty.
http://www.econlib.org/library/Mill/mlP.html. Originally published, 1848.

Miller, Ernest. ‘Woody Guthrie on Copyright’. Copyfight July 27, 2004.
http://copyfight.corante.com/archives/2004/07/27/woody_guthrie_on_copyright.php.

O’Reilly, Tim ‘What is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the
Next Generation of Software’ March 2007. Munich Personal RePEc Archive, MPRA
Paper no. 4578 (posted 7 November 2007).
http://mpra.ub.unimuenchen.de/4578/1/MPRA_paper_4578.pdf. 

Proudhon, P.J.  ‘What is Property? An Inquiry into the Principle of Right and
of Government’. Project Gutenberg Ebook no. 360.
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/360. Originally published, 1890.

Ricardo, David. ‘An Essay on Profits’. London: John Murray,1815. McMaster
University, Faculty of Social Science website,
http://socserv.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/ricardo/profits.txt. 

Ricardo, David. On Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. Library of
Economics and Liberty, http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricPCover.html.
Originally published, London: John Murray, 1821.

Seuss, Dr. Seuss. If I Ran the Circus. Random House, 1956.

Smiers, Joost and Marieke van Schijndel. No Copyright and No Cultural
Conglomerates Too: An Essay. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2009.
http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/theoryondemand/titles/no04-imagine-there-are-is-no-copyright-and-no-cultural-conglomorates-too/.

Stallman, Richard. ‘Copyleft: Pragmatic Idealism’. GNU Operating System.
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/pragmatic.html. 

Thorstein, Veblen. ‘Chapter 4: Conspicuous Consumption’. The Theory of the
Leisure Class. Bremen, Germany: Europaeischer Hochschulverlag GmbH &amp; Co KG,
2010. Originally published, 1899.

Tucker, Benjamin. ‘State Socialism and Anarchism: How far they agree, and
wherein they differ’. The Anarchist Library.
http://flag.blackened.net/daver/anarchism/tucker/tucker2.html. Originally
published in Benjamin Tucker, Individual Liberty (New York: Vanguard Press,
1926). 

United Nations University-World Institute for Development Economics Research.
‘Richest 2% Own Half the World’s Wealth’. update.unu.edu 44 (December
2006-February 2007). http://update.unu.edu/issue44_22.htm. 

‘Web 2.0’. Wikipedia.org. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_2.0.

Notes
