Bandwagons and Buzzwords
========================

* by Eric Lee *\
* Originally published in Industrial Worker *\

The new technology, they said, was going to transform the Internet
forever. Instead of you having to go online and “pull” web pages to your
browser, it would ’push’ pages to you. In fact, it was making the web
browser itself obsolete. It was such an amazing thing that Rupert
Murdoch’s News Corporation (owner of Fox News) offered \$450 million to
buy the company. And companies, media outlets, even unions, were told,
“you’d better get on board or you’ll be left behind.”

Some of you may recognize the story I am telling; it describes something
called PointCast, which most of you may never have heard of. But it, and
its so-called “push technology” were the next big thing a decade ago.

Most of you have never heard of it because, like so many next big
things, it fell as quickly as it rose, and its massive overvaluation
turned out to be a harbinger of things to come. Three years later the
dotcom bubble burst and PointCast was never heard from again.

A year after PointCast peaked, another company, an Israeli startup,
called Mirabilis, had developed the next next big thing. America Online
(now Time Warner) snapped up the company for a mere \$407 million in
1998 and its four young owners could now retire as millionaires.

Never heard of Mirabilis? Maybe you’ve heard of its sole product – an
instant messaging client called ICQ. Or maybe not. Today ICQ is one of
dozens of such products and others (such as MSN Messenger, Jabber or
even Skype) seem far more popular. I wonder if anyone reading this
article uses ICQ. I know that I haven’t for several years.

The stories of PointCast and ICQ should be a warning to those who are
willing to jump on any bandwagon and advocate the adoption of every
shiny new thing on the Internet—or else face the danger of falling
behind.

Here’s a much more recent example: a couple of years ago, the next big
thing on the Internet was the social networking site MySpace. This time,
Rupert Murdoch’s company did manage to purchase it for \$580 million in
2005. Shortly thereafter, the site lost much of its luster as it became
increasingly regarded as just another arm of Murdoch’s evil empire.
Today MySpace is no longer seen by anyone as being particularly “cool.”

In 2005, MySpace was the next big thing. If you were serious about using
the Internet, if you wanted to reach out to millions of people, you
absolutely needed to be there. But not anymore.

Now it’s 2008 and there are even more bandwagons to jump on. The latest
is Facebook. *(editor’s note: 2009/twitter.)* Unions are being told that
they need a presence on Facebook or else no one will know they exist.
They need to use Facebook to mobilize thousands of people, to send a
strong message to companies and governments, to grow their ranks, to
make unions seem relevant to young people.

What a fantastic tool—it allows you to mobilize people online. But wait
a minute—isn’t this something we’ve been doing with websites since day
one?

It is, but here’s the difference. Let’s say I set up a group on Facebook
to tell the Burmese government to stop crushing democracy. I’ll get tens
of thousands of people to sign up to join my group. And I’ll
announce—we’ve got a giant Facebook group. We’ve got all these committed
people. We’re practically a mass movement.

But hang on—in what sense is a Facebook group a “group?” How does it
differ from a simple online petition? The answer to the latter question
is that it doesn’t differ—it’s just another way of doing an online
petition. A worse way.

If I set up my online campaign on Facebook I can, in theory, email all
members of my group. Not really, though. What I can do is to send them
messages through Facebook—not to their actual email addresses, but to
their Facebook accounts, forcing them to login to Facebook to read my
message. Even if they do this, it adds an additional couple of steps for
them to follow.

If my Facebook group is over 1,000 names, I can’t email them—and our
experience has been that even with groups of under 1,000 names, the
email doesn’t always seem to work.

What you’re doing by outsourcing your campaigning to Facebook is growing
their company, and giving them direct access to your supporters and
members. What’s the alternative? Do-it-yourself online campaigns where
you retain all the information on who has sent off protest messages.

At LabourStart, we have campaigned this way for years. Every time we do
a campaign, we collect the emails, names and unions of participants. If
they give us permission, we add them to our mailing list and they
receive our weekly email newsletter. Our list has grown from 3,000 names
five years ago to 51,000 names today as a result of these campaigns.

Imagine if Facebook had existed five years ago and if we had tried to
campaign using it. We wouldn’t have a mailing list today and we
certainly wouldn’t be able to send out more than 50,000 emails a week.

Facebook is a poor replacement for a real online campaigning strategy
for unions. It makes us vulnerable to the whims of those who own the
company. Microsoft has invested \$246 million in Facebook. It sees
Facebook the same way that Murdoch saw MySpace (or PointCast) – as a way
to make money.

Further, unions that have tried to use Facebook have not always had such
great experiences. Earlier this year, the Service Employees
International Union (SEIU) tried to organize casino workers in Nova
Scotia, Canada. They used Facebook and were shocked to find that their
Facebook account had been closed. When they asked for an explanation
they were told that they were an organization, not an individual, and
weren’t allowed to have an account (SEIU replied that companies were
allowed to have Facebook accounts, but this had no effect).

A union in South Korea using a similar system was engaged in an
organizing campaign collecting details of potential members, all of
which was lost when the company shut them down.

The lesson I learn from all this is that the best tools are the ones we
wield ourselves—and that the best way for unions to campaign online is
not to jump on the latest bandwagon, but to spend the time, effort and
money to create powerful online campaigning systems ourselves.
