**How I Created and Reconciled My Separate Spaces On the Web**

*by Sarah Dopp*\

Hi, my name is Sarah, and I’m a compulsive blogger. It all started in
high school when I created a website under a pseudonym and used it to
tell stories about my love life. It was a thrilling and introspective
project that resulted in a lot of great writing. Unfortunately, I was so
terrified someone would connect it to me that I never saved a backup
copy. That website has since expired and those words are now lost
forever in the murky underbelly of the Internet. First lesson learned:
If I’m not going to claim something, I can’t hold onto it.

My next blog was more open but less personal. In 2001, my first year of
college, I used my student web space to keep an online journal about my
day-to-day interests and experiences. I kept each post short and simple
and figured no one would care about them except me. I was wrong. A few
months into my semester, I discovered that the school’s student websites
were listed on an obscure page at the main college website, which you
could find if you browsed deep enough into the menus. Prospective
freshmen, it turned out, were inclined to browse that deep. Since I was
one of the only people at the college making use of my student web
space, I started receiving daily emails with questions about the campus
from high school seniors all over the country. Second lesson learned: I
can give myself a voice, but I can’t control what it means to other
people.

I spent the following summer in China, living for four months on my own
after a brief study abroad session ended. The cultural differences were
jarring to me, and I needed a way to tell the stories to my family and
friends back home. I started a blog on Blogger.com with a few
self-imposed restrictions: I wouldn’t tell anyone in China that I was
doing it and I wouldn’t use my last name or my Chinese name. The
arrangement was perfect—I could speak freely about my discomforts and
misadventures without offending anyone around me, and I could keep my
U.S. contacts aware of how I was doing. Unfortunately, my sensitive
grandparents also heard about the blog, read some of my more dramatic
stories, and became very upset about how dangerous my overseas situation
seemed to them. From then on I continued to tell exciting stories, but I
made sure to edit my posts to emphasize how safe I was. Third lesson
learned: I have a responsibility to respect my audience, but I get to
decide how to do that.

My next major blog started off public and then later became private. I
created it on Livejournal.com, wrote under my real name, and used it to
speak freely about my emotions, opinions, and relationships. I was
wrestling with gender and sexuality issues and I needed a place to write
it all down. I shared it with my friends but didn’t mention it to my
family or work contacts, and just trusted that it would stay off their
radar. A year into the project, I realized I was censoring my own
writing out of fear that it would be discovered, and I started to resent
the project. Livejournal, fortunately, has excellent privacy settings,
so I changed the entire blog over to “friends only” access. The downside
was that my journal became harder to read—friends had to log in to their
Livejournal accounts in order to view it, and it could no longer be
found by the casual web surfer. The upside, though, was that I felt
(mostly) free and safe to write without editing myself, and that’s an
incredible gift. Fourth lesson learned: Sometimes I need to choose
between freedom and visibility.

After a few years of living behind a locked Livejournal, I realized I
missed having a public voice, so I started another blog. I created it at
SarahDopp.com, considered it my professional web presence, and knew it
would stick with me for a long time. I was careful to only write things
that made me look respectable, reliable, and valuable. This created a
clear division of content in my life: things that belonged in my locked
Livejournal, and things that belonged on my public blog. Since I had
different audiences in each space, I started to develop two separate
reputations: people either perceived me as professional and
clear-headed, or as messy and neurotic. In my less confident moments
this affected my self-image, and I began to think of myself as
dishonest. Fifth lesson learned: When I’m managing multiple personae,
I’m not representing myself as a whole person.

With all these lessons piling up under my belt, I decided to try my hand
at something new. I started a blog called Genderfork.com, where I posted
daily photos of androgynous people and discussed issues around gender
variance. This project was way outside of my comfort zone, so I used a
pseudonym and only told my closest friends about it. I was afraid that
it wouldn’t go well, that people would leave abusive comments, or that
it would deter future clients and employers from hiring me. Miraculously
(to me), the project was successful. People left encouraging comments,
thanked me for creating the site, engaged in the conversation, and
recommended photos for me to use. I became proud of the project and
wanted to share it with other people, but realized I wasn’t set up to do
that. Sixth lesson learned: My separate personae do not get to take
credit for each others’ accomplishments.

Finally, my web identities became too fractured for me to manage and I
decided it was time to reconcile it all. I came out on my professional
blog as queer, announced myself as the editor of Genderfork, and braced
myself for a fall-out of drama and controversy. The results were
surprising. I received an endless stream of support and encouragement
and my professional relationships strengthened immediately. Within two
months, I was interviewed on television and the radio about my
grapplings with identity issues, was invited to guest blog on several
websites, and was asked to be on a conference panel about “coming out”
on the Internet. My blog readership has grown considerably, and I feel
protected by a safety net of people who are emotionally invested in
encouraging me to be myself. Seventh lesson learned: the general public
is much more capable of accepting me than I gave them credit for.

Sarah Dopp is a blogger, poet, and website development consultant in San
Francisco. She is also the editor of Genderfork.com, a project that
explores androgyny and gender variance through artistic photography.
Read more at:\
<http://www.sarahdopp.com/blog>

1.  Use separate spaces. If you never ever want your personae to be
    connected with each other, make sure you’re accessing the web from
    different IP addresses. Public computers at the library are
    ideal—they’re very unlikely to be traced back to you. If privacy
    isn’t critical, on the other hand, try using multiple web browsers
    (e.g., Firefox for one persona and Safari for another). This will
    allow you to stay logged into websites that both of your personae
    use and maintain separate sets of bookmarks.

2.  Choose your tools wisely. Are you speaking to a specific group of
    people or do you want to be seen by the whole Internet? Many social
    networking websites offer privacy options that can make your persona
    only visible on a “need to know” basis. If privacy is a concern,
    limiting your audience may help you sleep better at night.

3.  Stick to your boundaries. What are you going to talk about with this
    persona? What are you going to talk about with that other persona?
    Are they going to overlap at all? (If so, make sure you don’t repeat
    any content word-for-word under both names.) What rules are you
    going to set for yourself to maintain your privacy? It’s important
    to honor the commitments you make to yourself, and to think long and
    hard about it before you change your own rules.

4.  Watch yourself. The key to consistency is to know what your web
    presence looks like at all times. Subscribe to Google Alerts and
    Technorati search feeds for all of your names and blog titles to see
    where they show up on the web. If someone should write about you in
    a way that violates your privacy, you need to be able to respond
    right away.

5.  Remember that humans make mistakes. Even the most fastidious
    security geek can relax for a moment and miss a tiny detail that
    will topple a house of cards and the possibility of mistakes
    increases exponentially when you start to tell friends what you’re
    doing. Before you write a word on the internet, stop and think about
    the possibility that your real world identity may someday be
    connected to it. It’s uncomfortable, it’s terrifying, and you can
    work like crazy to make sure it doesn’t happen... but just think
    about that worst case scenario for a moment. Could you survive? Is
    the risk worth it? Probably? Okay, then get your voice out there!


