Who’s the Terrorist?\
Blogging Against Surveillance
=============================

*by Anne Roth, annalist@riseup.net*\

On July 31 of last year, at seven in the morning, armed police stormed
into the apartment I share with my partner, Andrej Holm, and our two
children. We learned that day that Andrej was a terrorism suspect and
that an investigation had been going on for almost a year. Andrej was
arrested and flown to Germany’s Court of Justice the next day. The
search of our apartment lasted fifteen hours. I was forced to wake my
children, dress them and make them eat breakfast with an armed policeman
watching us. That day my new life started, a life as the partner of one
of Germany’s top terrorists.

Andrej spent three weeks in investigative detention. The details of how
the arrest warrant was issued caused a public outcry, not only in
Germany but also in many other countries. Open letters were sent to the
court that were signed by several thousand people protesting the
arrests. Among the signatures were those of David Harvey, Mike Davis,
Saskia Sassen, Richard Sennett and Peter Marcuse.

What had happened?
------------------

Hours before Germany’s federal police came to our home, three men were
arrested near Berlin who were said to have tried to set fire to several
army vehicles. The original investigation was started against four other
men, of whom Andrej is one, who are suspected of being the authors of
texts written by a group called “militante gruppe” (mg, militant group).
The group is known in Germany for damaging property for years, but never
using violence against people. The texts are claiming responsibility for
arson attacks against cars and buildings since 2001. German anti-terror
law §129a of the penal code was used to start an anti-terror
investigation against the four. All of them write and publish online.
Andrej works as a sociologist on issues such as gentrification and the
situation of tenants. Outside academia he is actively involved in tenant
organizations and movements that deal with gentrification and city
development. Since ‘militant group’ uses words such as ‘gentrification’,
‘marxist-leninist’, ‘precarisation’ or ‘reproduction’ and Andrej also
uses terms like these in his research papers, the state considered this
sufficient evidence to justify complete surveillance (a subsequent
linguistic analysis by the Federal Police later showed its most unlikely
Andrej wrote these texts). As we later learned from Andrej’s files, the
profile for the ‘militant group’ was based on several assumptions.
Members of the ‘militant group’ are assumed to: have close ties within
the group (all four have been good friends for years); be leftist
political activists; have no prior police record; use ‘conspiratorial
behavior’, such as encrypting email and using anonymous mail addresses
(not made of proper first and last names); be critical researchers and
as such have access to libraries and a variety of daily papers; and have
profound political and historical knowledge.

The initial suspicion, which was based on internet research for
similarities in writing and vocabulary, led to surveillance of several
forms: phone tapping, video cameras pointed at living spaces, emails and
internet traffic being monitored, bugging devices in cars, bugging
operations on people’s conversations, etc. None of these produced valid
evidence and so every two or three months surveillance measures were
expanded. Anti-terror investigations, according to §129a of the penal
code, are known and infamous for the fact that they are being carried
out secretly and that less than 5% ever produce enough evidence to lead
to actual court cases. The vast majority entail lengthy investigations,
during which huge amounts of data (mostly on activists) are collected,
and after years of activity the case is dropped without anyone ever
knowing about it.

The ‘terrorist’ deeds themselves are not being prosecuted, but rather
membership in or support of the named terrorist organization. Therefore,
investigations focus on ‘who knows who and why.’ At this moment we know
of four such cases carried out against 40 activists in Germany last
year. Participation in protests against the G8 played a prominent role,
but not the only one. In all four cases the names of more than 2000
people were found in the files that were handed over to the defendants:
a good indicator of what these investigations are really good for.

In our case it is likely that all people who had any kind of interaction
with Andrej during 2006-7 were checked by the police. As a result, they
discovered two meetings that allegedly took place in February and April
of 2007 with someone who was later included in the investigation as a
fifth suspect, and then two other individuals who were in touch with
this ‘No. 5’. The two meetings took place under “highly conspiratorial
circumstances”: no mobile phones were taken along, the meeting had been
arranged using so-called anonymous mail accounts, and, during the
meeting—a walk outside—the two turned around several times.

The three who were included in the investigation are the same three who
were arrested after the alleged arson attempt. Some hours later special
police forces stormed our home and Andrej was dubbed ‘the brain behind
the militant group.’ My identity changed to that of ‘the terrorist’s
partner.’

What to do?
-----------

I was in shock. Berlin was on summer break. The few of us who were not
away got together to gather the little we understood about the
accusations. The media rejoiced with headlines such as ‘Federal Police
finally succeed in arresting long-searched-for terror group’ and we had
to deal with media inquiries, talk to lawyers, talk to relatives, talk
to friends, colleagues, neighbors and our children. We had to learn
about life in prison, start a campaign for donations to pay for lawyers,
create a website, agree on how to proceed with a rather heterogeneous
group of suspects and an even more heterogeneous network of friends and
supporters, and discuss how to deal with the media.

I slowly realized that my children and I were the collateral damage in
this case. My computer was confiscated, items were taken from my desk,
all of my belongings searched. My kids (2 and 5 years old last summer)
lived through two searches conducted by armed police. Their father was
kidnapped and was not returned for weeks.

Being a political activist myself, I am of course aware of the fact that
phones can be tapped and that this is used extensively against
activists. In Germany close to 40,000 phones (including mobiles) are
tapped each year – we have a total population of 80 million. To realize
and later to read on paper that this concerns you is entirely different
from the somewhat abstract idea that you may be subjected to it.

When Andrej was released on bail after three weeks, the Federal
Prosecutor of Germany filed a complaint and wanted him back in detention
right away, based on the idea that he might flee the country or that
there was danger of repetition. How do you repeat membership in a
terrorist organization? One of the many mysteries inside the prosecutors
mind. The complaint was not granted right away but instead Germany’s
Court of Justice decided it needed time to reflect thoroughly on the
details of the arrest warrant (which was the origin of the huge wave of
solidarity that was widely covered in the media), the question of
whether the so-called group actually qualified as ‘terrorist’ and
whether the presented evidence justified detention.

It was impossible to miss the fact that Andrej was the focus of police
observation. Our phones went crazy—more than once people tried to call
Andrej’s mobile number but ended up on my phone instead. When I tried to
call him, I got my own mailbox talking to me. Our TV behaved funny (as a
result of silent or stealth pings that were sent to Andrej’s mobile
phone regularly to locate him). Emails disappeared.

At some point in the middle of this I considered starting a weblog. To
my knowledge nobody had ever written a blog about living under
anti-terror surveillance. It was not an easy decision: were people going
to believe me? Would I be portrayed as crazy or paranoid? On the other
hand, unlike many other people I knew for sure that surveillance was
taking place, so why not write about what it felt like? Germany had a
major debate about data retention last summer—the law had just passed
and was to go into effect 2008. A new anti-terror federal police law was
discussed in parliament and a public debate about data protection grew
to dimensions nobody had thought possible some months before. The War on
Terror serves to justify more repressive laws here as well. A blog about
the consequences of an investigation into a family that is admittedly
interested in politics (and actively involved), but otherwise not
exactly the typical terrorist stereotype, could open many eyes.

Initially, I did not like the idea of blogging, precisely because I am
quite fond of my privacy. Why present my personal daily life to a
largely anonymous public? Absurd. But now, after my privacy had been
violated beyond imagination, why not talk about what it feels like to
people who are more sympathetic than the Federal Prosecutor? Why not
talk about how ridiculous the ‘facts’ to prove the case really are? And
there are so many amazingly strange interpretations of how we live our
life, of what Andrej said on the phone, of what my mother said on the
phone, that I thought nobody would believe these details just some
months later.

And so I started blogging. Mostly in German, primarily because I didn’t
find the time to translate more, but also because I thought that
interested readers would mostly be German. You can find some texts in
English there, too, however.

I wasn’t familiar with the world of blogs, and probably still am not. I
didn’t have time to find out how to ‘make your blog popular’ and was not
particularly interested in doing so. I wasn’t really sure how much
attention I’d like. I started by publishing in the blog the same things
I had emailed to people interested in the development of the case and in
how we were doing personally. I only told people I knew about it. It
took about three weeks before some of the more popular political German
blogs picked it up and wrote about us, and then the number of visits
exploded. In the beginning people wondered whether this, and I, ‘was
real.’ The blog received lots of comments and it was obvious that many
people were completely shocked about what was happening. They compared
the investigation to what they imagined having taken place in the Soviet
Union, China, North Korea, East Germany, but not ‘here’, in a Western
democracy, a constitutional state. Another group consisted of people who
wanted to help us secure our privacy. They explained email encryption,
switching SIM cards in mobile phones and the like, not realizing that at
least in the first months we actively avoided anything that could make
it seem like we wanted to behave in a conspiratorial manner, as this was
one of the reasons Andrej became a suspect to begin with.

I thought it was pretty funny that because I was ‘the sociologist’s
wife’ (we are not married), people seemed to assume that Linux or
encryption were things I’d never heard of. Many people expressed fear
that by reading my blog or commenting on it they might endanger
themselves. I was glad they did anyway. Others expressed admiration for
our choice to be so public about the case. All of this was great and
very important support that made it much easier to deal with the ongoing
stress and tension that comes with the threat of being tried as a
terrorist.

Fortunately, the Court of Justice made several decisions that were very
favorable for Andrej. First, two months after the prosecutor’s complaint
about his release on bail, the court decided not only to deny the
complaint but also to completely withdraw the arrest warrant, arguing
that ‘pure assumptions are not sufficient.’ This decision was perceived
by many journalists as a ‘slap in the face’ to Germany’s Federal
Prosecutor . One month later the same court decided against the
‘militant group’ being considered a ‘terrorist organization.’. The
German definition for terrorism demands that a terrorist act be intended
and able to shake the state to its very foundations, or else to terrify
the population as such. Germany’s minister of justice, Brigitte Zypries,
was asked about the case against the alleged members of the ‘militant
group’ in an interview with Der Spiegel, one of the biggest political
weekly magazines, and she said that she thought that the September 11
attacks were a terrible tragedy, but not a terrorist act by her
definition as they didn’t manage to endanger the American state. We were
rather surprised by this, to say the least. In November the Court of
Justice decided that the ‘militant group’ can’t be considered terrorist
and ordered that the other three people arrested be released on bail.
Now the investigation is being carried out under §129 (instead of
§129a), which prosecutes criminal instead of terrorist organizations,
with possible sentences up to five, instead of ten, years.

When Andrej was arrested for ‘being a terrorist’, on the grounds of
being intelligent, knowing many people from different spheres of
society, accessing libraries, and publishing texts, it felt possible
that they’d sentence him to a prison term. But after months of public
support and with more details of the investigation becoming public, I,
like many others, starting believing that this nightmare was terminal,
that the case would have to be dropped eventually. Most people don’t
realize that the investigation is actually still going on. All of our
phone calls are still being listened to, our emails read, Andrej’s every
step is being watched. Germany discusses online searches of computers
and using hidden cameras in people’s living spaces to detect terrorists
and we know that the secret service is using what the police only dream
of.

l

30mm

It’s been an extremely straining life for almost a year now, but I am
convinced that a better way of surviving something like this, something
that terrorized us, our children, our families and friends, is not to go
into hiding. I understand very well the feeling of wanting to stay still
until it’s all over, to not provoke any (legal) action when you’re the
focus of this kind of attention. But I also deeply believe that public
attention and protest saved us and that, for me personally, the best
thing I could do was to not keep all my fear inside but instead to share
and raise awareness of what the war on terror looks like in detail.

*More information:*\
<http://annalist.noblogs.org/category/en>\
<http://einstellung.so36.net/en>\
<http://einstellung.so36.net/en/ps/392>\
<http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrej_Holm>\
<http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_retention>\

1

(-.1,1) ![image](nightmares)
