btw: Make those IMâ€™s more secure!
=================================

*by Jae Muzzin*

If you gotta chat with instant messaging, take the step to make your
conversations slightly more secure.

Using a free download of open source software, it is possible to setup
an encrypted communication channel over instant message networks such as
MSN and AIM. The software is called Pidgin (formerly GAIM), and works as
a third party client for instant message systems. This means you run
Pidgin on your desktop PC instead of the usual MSN or AIM client (that
pummel you with advertisements and other annoyances). Pidgin can be
downloaded at www.pidgin.im. To set up the secure channel, both you and
a friend need to be running pidgin and the pidgin-encryption plugin at
pidgin-encrypt.sourceforge.net. Open a conversation window to your
friend and you will see a button to turn encryption on. Once this is
turned on, no one can spy on your conversation without cracking the RSA
encryption.

Another good plugin for Pidgin that not only encrypts, but also protects
your conversations is the Off-the-Record (OTR) plugin. Using the OTR
plugin allows you and your friends to have private conversations over IM
that are encrypted, assures you that the person you are speaking to is
who you think it is, and also offers the added benefit of deniability.
This means that the messages you send can not be traced back to you by a
third party. Anyone can forge messages after a conversation to make them
look like they came from you, but during a conversation, your
correspondent is assured that the messages they see are authentic and
unmodified. Finally, if your computer becomes compromised, no previous
conversation is compromised because the secret keys stored on your
computer cannot be used to read your past conversations.
