Why security matters
====================

Every email takes a perilous journey. It might travel across twenty
networks and be stored on five computers from the time it is composed to
the time it is read. At every step of the way, the contents of the email
might be monitored, archived, cataloged, and indexed.

However, it is not the contents of our online communications that our
adversaries find most interesting: a spying organization is most
concerned with whom we communicate. There are many ways in which this
kind of mapping of our associations is far worse than old-fashioned
eavesdropping. By cataloging our associations, a spying organization has
an intimate picture of how our social movements are organized—perhaps a
more detailed picture than we have of ourselves.

This is bad. Really bad. The US government (like most governments) has a
long track record of doing whatever it can to subvert, imprison, kill,
or squash social movements that it sees as a threat (forest defense,
black power, native rights, anti-war, civil rights, organized labor,
anti-slavery and so on), and now they have all the tools they need to do
this with blinding precision.

We believe that private communication, without eavesdropping, and
without mapping of our associations, is necessary for a democratic
society. We must defend the right to free speech, but it is just as
necessary to defend the right to private speech.

Unfortunately, private communication is impossible if only a few people
practice it: they will stand out and this will expose them to increased
scrutiny. Therefore, we believe it is important for all of us to
incorporate as many security measures into our online lives as possible.

What a gloomy picture!
======================

Happily, there are many things you can do. Step one is *education*. Know
the risks and know the pitfalls. And make sure your friends and lovers
do, too. Step two is *action*. It is not enough to know, we must also
do. This zine will help outline some of the simple and not-so-simple
things you should know and things you should do.

Do you want a bullet list of priorities for action? Then, here you go:

-   *Secure Connections:* by using secure connections, you protect your
    login information and your data while it is in transport.

-   *Secure Providers:* when you send mail to and from secure email
    providers, you can protect the content of your communication and
    also the pattern of your associations.

-   *Public Key Encryption:* although it requires a little more work,
    public key encryption is the best way to keep the content of your
    communications private.

Remember: even if you don’t personally need privacy, practicing secure
communication will ensure that others have the ability to freely
organize and agitate.

1

(-.05,1.1) ![image](racoon)
