Is the Cure Worse than the Illness?
===================================

*by PB Floyd*\

In discussing security culture, activists have to be careful to keep our
priorities clear in our minds. Our first priority is action for social
change. With that as the priority, it is wise to consider how to reduce
risks to ourselves and that is where security culture comes in. But if
we focus too much on security culture, reducing risk can easily eclipse
the primary priority of taking action to promote social transformation.

I’ve noticed that a certain kind of paralyzing thinking has increased
over the last few years as discussing security culture has become more
popular. People and groups get so tied up in making sure their action is
secure that they end up not doing the action, or they only do it in a
very tiny way with a very tiny group of trusted friends. When security
culture makes us too paranoid to publicize any kind of action, our
activist priorities have been turned backwards. When we focus too much
on security culture, we over-estimate and confuse risks.

For example, there are dramatically different risks in having insecure
discussions of an illegal action like a road blockade, lock down, tree
sit, or billboard alteration versus having one about arson. All of these
things may be illegal and monitored by the police, but the penalty for
arson can be 30 years in prison, whereas the penalties for a lock down
are minimal. Sure, it is best that the police don’t know that we’re
going to have a lock down, but if the security measures we adopt make it
impossible to organize the action beyond a tiny circle of trusted
people, we may have missed the point. Social change requires a lot more
than any specific action—it requires building community and a broad
social movement. This means moving beyond activist cul-de-sacs, making
our process open, accessible, and democratic, and welcoming lots of
different kinds of people to join in. Broad openness is directly opposed
to a lot of security culture guidelines.

What I’ve noticed is that security culture tactics that might be very
reasonable if one was organizing a highly illegal arson have been
popping up in the context of much less risky actions. This weakens our
movement. We should not reserve direct action for a tiny group of our
trusted friends. The practice and experience of direct action is a
life-changing event for many people, and our movement needs *more*
places to share these transformative experiences with new folks.

When I was introduced to radical direct action in 1984, I’m pretty sure
I never heard a discussion of security culture. It wasn’t that we did
not realize that the police might be monitoring us with the goal of
stopping our actions. Many activists I met then were veterans of the
1960s—they were keenly aware of the FBI’s COINTELPRO. But what I
remember was that the folks who were my mentors when I was a teenage
activist weren’t scared or paranoid. They were very aware of the risks
and they met the fear with a huge reserve of courage. I remember being
at huge, open spokescouncil meetings and huge, open action trainings. It
was all very open even though we were pretty sure the cops were
watching. And our actions were large and diverse as a result. My first
arrest was when I was 16 years old for sitting in front of a train
carrying nuclear weapons. Over 100 of us took that bust. The only way to
organize actions on that scale (it was part of an on-going campaign of
actions) was focusing on openness and not on security.

Discussions of security culture are a more recent trend in the scene and
it makes sense in view of 9/11 and the green scare arrests of Jeffrey
“Free” Leurs, Daniel McGowen and others. But when we discuss action, we
have to keep in mind that few of us will ever take an action like Free
took.

I hope that many, even most, of us will have the opportunity to
participate in some form of direct action, including illegal actions.
Sometimes breaking the law is a necessary part of social change.

Just today, I was faced with this kind of dilemma. I’m involved with a
radical community space and we agreed to allow the local low-power
pirate radio station to put a transmitter on our roof. Last night, I got
the word that it was going up today. The collective that runs the
community space has to be an open, non-secure group in order to welcome
newcomers and be a publicly accessible portal into the activist scene.
So there is a non-secure email list for volunteers—it is very hard to
really know who is on that email list because there are new volunteers
constantly signing up. Someone had to send out an email message saying,
“The antenna is going up today. If the FCC or the police show up, don’t
let them in unless they have a warrant.” That someone was me—and I have
to admit that I felt tense hitting the send button because I knew that
sending the email connected me personally with the whole situation. Even
if I didn’t personally send the email, I and many other people are
publicly connected with the space.

Is sending an email like this—or deciding to allow a pirate antenna on
your group’s roof... risky? Sure it is—it could subject us to fines,
police raids, even possibly jail time. There is no way to take this
action in a manner consistent with security culture. The FCC can locate
the signal from the antenna and it is sitting physically on our roof. We
really have to choose to accept the risk and do the action, or avoid the
risk and not do the action. So it is a matter of considering the risks,
balancing this against the reward, and deciding between fear and
fearlessness.

I want us to discuss the security culture, but part of that discussion
has to be about when we’ll go ahead and do stuff even when there are
clear risks that can’t be mitigated or avoided. Hopefully, our
discussion of security culture will emphasize that if it makes us too
paranoid or careful to actually act, then we’ve lost our way.

1

(-.1,7) ![image](this_phone_is_tapped)
