*by Amanda B. Hickman*\

In a perfect world, you would use a unique password for every password
protected function that you hope to keep private. That unique password
would be 14 characters long and not resemble any word in the dictionary
(password is out, and so is passw0rd and pa55word). Your passwords would
never be written down anywhere, ever.

Got it? Great. Now let’s get real. If you are ready to be responsible
about password use but can’t quite get your head around the instructions
above, here are some tips to make you less insecure:

​1. Not every password needs to be secure: Pick one really easy password
and use it only for nuisance logins, those sites where you know you
won’t really care if someone gets a hold of your account. Yes, someone
could steal your password, but what are they going to do with it? If
you’re worried about protecting your privacy, use a better password, but
if you aren’t, use the same plain word over and over again and don’t
think twice about it. Good examples of nuisance logins are:

-   Newspapers and other online content

-   Travel sites like Expedia, or airline sites that require you to
    login to search (as long as you haven’t saved your credit card
    information!)

-   Email lists, anywhere that warns you that your password will be sent
    to you in cleartext[^1]

-   Photo sharing sites (especially if you aren’t using your own
    identity and instead using a pseudonym)

A good way to decide whether or not something is a nuisance login is
this: Ask yourself, what is the very worst possible thing that could
happen if someone got a hold of my password or took over my account? If
your answer is “meh,” it is a nuisance. If your answer is something
closer to “oooh, that would not be good” you should opt for a harder
password.

​2. It is okay to reuse a password if you change it from time to time
and only use it in secure places. For things that are private but not
life or death, invent a semi-random password that you can remember. For
a while I used “14ONHbro” because my kid brother, Oliver N Hickman, was
about to turn 14 and I was thinking about getting him a birthday present
when I set up my first email account. For an added bonus, when I was
still using that password on his 18th birthday, that was a good reminder
that I should have switched passwords. Change that password every few
months. At a minimum, change it once a year.

Passwords you should keep to yourself:

-   your email account(s)

-   the (S)FTP login for your website

-   your blog login

​3. Don’t share private passwords. As an organization, or in
collaboration with other people, you may wind up with some passwords
that you can’t avoid sharing between many people. Realize that these
passwords are profoundly insecure and treat them as such: don’t reuse
your email password in a context where you’ll have to share it. (S)FTP
passwords and shared websites often fall into this category.

If you do share a private password, say, in an emergency, change it as
soon as possible and change it in the other places where you use it.

​4. There’s private and then there’s really private. Some things are
really sensitive. If you’re accountable to more than just yourself, be
responsible about the passwords you choose. Use really random passwords
and don’t reuse them. If you’re keeping sensitive data in a web-based
membership database, or if you access a shared file server remotely, you
should have a truly random password. If you don’t save the password,
you’ll find that as you type it over and over you get as used to it as
any regular word. I eventually find that my random passwords are almost
pronounceable.

Random password generators aren’t hard to find, but here is one that I
like:\
<http://pctools.com/guides/password>

UChicago has a great tip sheet on passwords:\
<http://safecomputing.uchicago.edu>

One good tip: use the first letter of each word in a saying or lyric
that you’ll remember, like “Poverty anywhere is Poverty everywhere!”
becomes “PaiPe!” or “Four score and seven years ago our fathers” becomes
“4sa7yaof.” Be careful not to pick something that can be connected to
you. For example, if you are using the first letter of the first 8
letters of the chorus of your favorite song, who knows that this is your
favorite song? Have you broadcast your favorites to social networking
sites?

Another good tip: when you play Scrabble (well, when I play scrabble
anyhow) I can imagine all kinds of letter combinations into words. Makes
it hard to play scrabble, but makes it easy to think of br2buVes as
“Brought two bu Vez”.

1.  Be Realistic: if you impose a rule that no one has time to follow,
    you are no better off than you were without any policies.

2.  Wherever possible, let users set their own passwords. When the whole
    organization shares a single password, it is much more difficult to
    change the password.

3.  Be Reasonable: be clear about why passwords matter in your
    organization. Is data sensitive? Is it confidential? Vulnerable to
    vandalism? There is a difference. If you are asking computer users
    to respect the confidentiality of the organization, say so. It seems
    less arbitrary.

4.  Set an Example: never ask users to share their passwords with you.
    Make sure you know how to reset passwords for email, database users,
    etc. and let users keep their passwords private. If you are footing
    the bill, your ISP should have no problem resetting a user’s email
    password if something happens and you need access to their account.

So what is the worst thing that could happen? Only you know how private
your email or other files are, so there are plenty of worst things that
I might not be able to list for you. On top of those, short of outright
robbery and identity theft (which do happen, and would probably be bad)
there are a few other sorts of things that might go terribly awry if you
aren’t being smart about passwords and privacy:

-   Someone could gain access to your email account, either because you
    logged in from a public terminal and didn’t log out, or because you
    logged in using a public wireless connection and someone sniffed out
    your signal. They might use your email account to send great
    quantities of spam, which could get your email provider blacklisted
    or get your account shut down. They might use your email account to
    send desperate messages to everyone in your address book begging for
    money (it happens pretty often).

-   Someone could use your (S)FTP login or website login to place a
    malicious script online that logs everyone else’s password attempts,
    and sends home a tidy little list of good username and password
    combinations to try on email servers.

\

​(cc) LINC Project April 2006\
Creative Commons AT-NC-SA 2.5

[^1]: Cleartext is text that is visible to the user. When you type in
    your password in a conventional password box, the text is obfuscated
    so that you cannot see it when you type. You see asterisks or
    bullets instead; that is not cleartext.
