StartTLS: 
==========

*by House Sparrow*\

In the waning days of Babylon and empire, what will the US government
think up next? According to leaks from sources ranging from the
intelligence bureaucracy to the New York Times, the New Yorker, and the
Wall Street Journal, the government’s new fun toy is the ability to
monitor our social networks by tracking, in real time, the patterns of
email, phone calls, text messages, and financial transactions. This
program is top secret, so you can’t take legal action because you can’t
prove the program exists (according to the catch-22 logic of a February
19th US Supreme Court decision).

The Clinton, Bush, and Obama administrations said the program is
entirely constitutional because it does not involve eavesdropping on the
content of our communications. Instead, it focuses on the pattern of our
relationships. In this way, individuals are not under surveillance, all
of society is. If your social movement has nothing to hide, then what
are you worried about? Plenty. This kind of map of our social networks
creates a ready made blueprint for disrupting any social movement deemed
to be a threat. In many ways, the government knows more about how we
organize than we do. This issue is important to all organizers, because
much of the world’s email is routed through the US.

So, what can we do about it? For starters, get everyone you know to
start using an email provider that uses StartTLS. For email, it is the
only thing that can protect against the surveillance of our social
networks. For a list of StartTLS providers besides Riseup see:\
<http://help.riseup.net/security/measures>

What about phone calls, internet chat, and social networking sites? Your
riseup birds don’t have all the answers, but we are working on it. One
thing we know, privacy and security are not solved by personal
solutions. If we want security, it will take a collective response and a
collective commitment to building alternative communication
infrastructure.

1

(1,3.2) ![image](bear_mt)
