*by jacqueanne*\

I opened up an email from Savannah College of Art and Design and my eyes
focused on an unexpected phrase: “Your message is subject to review.”
Wonderful. As a recent transplant to Savannah, I was trying to make
contact with certain “dangerous people”, such as whoever coordinates the
local Food-not-Bombs. Was something in my email asking when I could help
feed the homeless suspicious enough to be “subject to review?” Why is
SCAD screening my emails to begin with? Perhaps the word “bombs”
triggered something in the SCADmail system. Or maybe my educational
institution is randomly screening my emails. Either situation is
uncalled for: no one is going to write in a casual email, “Hey, I’m
bombing the fashion building Thursday at 2pm sharp—just to let you know.
Hope all is well.”

If my email did get reviewed, it must have been denied silently because
it was never sent. I think this is SCAD’s way of saying, “We do not want
to be connected with anything slightly controversial, so we can not
allow an email to an activist group to be sent with our name attached to
it in any manner.” Private Art School, your message is loud and clear.
The time for a new method of inter-web communication has come.

Maybe it is legal for colleges to screen emails, but it is not something
I, or any of my friends, want to be subjected to.

More secure email providers such as Riseup and Hushmail are what I
gratefully turned to. Riseup’s webpage prominently features something
refreshing: “We will not read, search, or process any of your incoming
or outgoing mail other than by automatic means to protect you from
viruses and spam or when directed to do so by you when troubleshooting.”

Of course, it is not just what server you select that makes a difference
in how secure your personal message is. Obvious things such as password
security and logging out when you finish are things that can easily be
overlooked. Public computers, such as the ones at libraries, are used by
countless individuals each day. Forgetting to log out will leave your
information open to the masses.

Commercial email providers are offering more and more storage space for
“free”, so people are using their accounts to store anything and
everything. Bank account numbers and names, backup documents, along with
personal emails are all in the system waiting to be hacked.

Want to secure yourself? Of course you do. One clever trick is to sign
up for a website hit counter (such as onestatfree.com). Fake the
information you provide, if you like. After signing up, you will receive
some emails, and one of them will include an attachment with a filename
like OneStatScript.txt. Write down your OneStat account number and
delete the email.

Now, change the name of the text document to something that would entice
someone snooping on your email, such as ‘passwordlist’ or ‘myaccounts’,
change the extension to .htm and make sure the format is html. Then,
email the file to the email account you would like to monitor. Now test
it by opening your email and then opening that attachment. By opening
this attachment, it should register a hit with the website hit counter,
so login there with your account information and see if a hit was
registered. Now just let that enticing email sit in your account and
periodically check your hit counter.

[20]l10em

If anyone opens this email and finds the attachment and opens it, a hit
will be recorded, showing you the time, date, location and IP address of
the person opening the attachment.

If you have even one hit, some is reading your mail! It is time for a
new password.

1

(-0.03,4.5) ![image](trap)
