You’re Evited to use the Master’s Tools!
========================================

*by Tufted Puffin*\

There are a lot of digital tools out there that offer to make our lives
better in some way. What if using corporate tools could make our
organizing easier? Isn’t it worth using the master’s tools to bring down
the master?

I thought about writing a tirade on Evites, but I realized my criticism
of Evites was more of a general criticism of so-called tools that we use
even though they don’t offer much. They may look flashy and shiny
(although Evites don’t even have that going for them...) and there must
be some reason that so many folks use them. Thanks to technology, I can
write micro-blog entries from a cell phone and share the books that I’ve
read, websites I like, my travel plans, and every other bit of minutia
about me. I’ve never publicized all this information before and it’s not
clear why it would be interesting to anybody but marketers, but maybe
this is what technology is all about. Other people are doing it, so why
shouldn’t I?

So what about Evites? What does an Evite offer to those invited to an
event? It requires opening the Evite link to see the actual information
about the event (where, when, etc.). It means anybody invited to the
event can see who else is invited, if they are coming, whether they are
bringing a hot date, etc. To some, this sort of voyeurism might be
interesting, or even motivate them to attend an event they wouldn’t have
attended otherwise.

But to others, an Evite might deter event attendance. Maybe the Evite
invitation has been blocked as spam, maybe going to the Evite website is
a pain, or impossible if one’s employer has blocked Evite. Maybe some
get pissed that everybody else invited (or with the proper URL) can see
that they have some tie with the organization and were invited to the
event. Maybe somebody is uncomfortable attending an event if they were
forwarded the Evite, and weren’t themselves invited. Even if Evite does
make organizing the event a teensy-bit simpler for organizers (and I’m
skeptical of this), shouldn’t the organizers add a bit of burden to
themselves to make attendance as easy and welcoming as possible for
potential attendees?

Why does Evite exist? Because some folks want to be “Your Own Personal
Party Planner?” Like most so-called free web services, Evite does what
it does to make money off you—they aren’t doing it out of their own love
of Superbowl parties or anarchist picnics. According to the annual
report of IAC/InterActiveCorp, the corporation that owns Evite, in 2007
they brought in \$758.5 million dollars in revenue from Evite and
Citysearch. Evite presumably makes their money off ads and partnerships
with people selling you shit. I don’t think they currently offer
paid-premium services, but maybe in the future they will. They probably
aren’t selling their list of email addresses to other companies, or
giving them to the NSA, but maybe they’ll choose to do that, too. And if
the government were to subpoena them for a list of people invited to a
radical event, do you think they would stand up to it? Not that the
government would even need a subpoena to compile a map of social
networks from Evites—it’s all public information.

To further complicate matters, it’s not just corporate tools that we
need to be skeptical of. Many tools are developed for pure reasons, but
still don’t make sense for every job. I’m thinking of complicated
Content Management Systems, like Drupal. Drupal is an open-source tool
for building and maintaining websites. For many organizations, a Drupal
site is great. But for others, it’s complete overkill—it doesn’t make
sense to put resources into using the features Drupal provides, and
instead organizations use Drupal to do what could be done just as well
with a static HTML website. I see this as an example of the non-profit
industrial complex, and the perceived need to professionalize
organizations, but it is also an example of feeling pressure, maybe from
a so-called expert, to use a tool that isn’t really useful for the need
in question.

I guess my point is to be skeptical. Tools can be great, and we should
use them. But we need to evaluate what tools to use, and why. We all
know that the norms of the system are fucked, and that “everybody is
doing it” is not an argument for anything. But it can be hard to
determine what new hyped toys are worth using, and which are bogus. In
some cases, it might be worth looking at offensive advertising or
accepting security violations in order to reach a broader community or
to simplify our organizing. But sometimes a tool only offers the
downsides, with minimal advantages. We should be careful about
normalizing the movement’s use of the master’s tools, and affirming the
idea that others know what we need better than we do.

1

(0,3.25) ![image](mt_scape_FTS)
